Project Gutenberg Etext The Valley of Fear, by Arthur Conan Doyle

Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the laws for your country before redistributing these files!!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.

Please do not remove this.

This should be the first thing seen when anyone opens the book.
Do not change or edit it without written permission.  The words
are carefully chosen to provide users with the information they
need about what they can legally do with the texts.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These Etexts Are Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below, including for donations.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a 501(c)(3)
organization with EIN [Employee Identification Number] 64-6221541



Title: The Valley of Fear

Author: Arthur Conan Doyle

Release Date: February, 2003  [Etext #3776]
[Yes, we are about one year ahead of schedule]
[The actual date this file first posted = 09/03/01]
[Date last updated: January 1st, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Project Gutenberg Etext The Valley of Fear, by Arthur Conan Doyle
******This file should be named vfear10a.txt or vfear10a.zip*****

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, vfear10a.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, vfear10b.txt

This etext was produced by Toby F. Charkin (t_charkin@yahoo.com)

Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,
all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless a
copyright notice is included.  Therefore, we usually do NOT keep any
of these books in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our books one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to send us error messages even years after
the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our sites at:
http://gutenberg.net
http://promo.net/pg


Those of you who want to download any Etext before announcement
can surf to them as follows, and just download by date; this is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03
or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release fifty new Etext
files per month, or 500 more Etexts in 2000 for a total of 3000+
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
should reach over 300 billion Etexts given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third
of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 4,000 Etexts unless we
manage to get some real funding.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of July 12, 2001 contributions are only being solicited from people
in:
Arkansas, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii,
Idaho,
Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Minnesota,
Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, New Mexico, Nevada, New Jersey, New York,
North
Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota,
Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West Virginia,
Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in about 45 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met,
additions to this list will be made and fund raising
will begin in the additional states.  Please feel
free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork
to legally request donations in all 50 states.  If
your state is not listed and you would like to know
if we have added it since the list you have, just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in
states where we are not yet registered, we know
of no prohibition against accepting donations
from donors in these states who approach us with
an offer to donate.


International donations are accepted,
but we don't know ANYTHING about how
to make them tax-deductible, or
even if they CAN be made deductible,
and don't have the staff to handle it
even if there are ways.

All donations should be made to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a 501(c)(3)
organization with EIN [Employee Identification Number] 64-6221541,
and has been approved as a 501(c)(3) organization by the US Internal
Revenue Service (IRS).  Donations are tax-deductible to the maximum
extent permitted by law.  As the requirements for other states are met,
additions to this list will be made and fund raising will begin in the
additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

hart@pobox.com forwards to hart@prairienet.org and archive.org
if your mail bounces from archive.org, I will still see it, if
it bounces from prairienet.org, better resend later on. . . .

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


***


Example command-line FTP session:

ftp ftp.ibiblio.org
login: anonymous
password: your@login
cd pub/docs/books/gutenberg
cd etext90 through etext99 or etext00 through etext02, etc.
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET GUTINDEX.??  [to get a year's listing of books, e.g., GUTINDEX.99]
GET GUTINDEX.ALL [to get a listing of ALL books]


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etexts,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States
copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this etext,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the etext,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.02/09/01*END*





This etext was produced by Toby F. Charkin (t_charkin@yahoo.com)





The Valley Of Fear by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle



PART 1
The Tragedy of Birlstone



Chapter 1
The Warning

"I am inclined to think -- " said I.

"I should do so," Sherlock Holmes remarked impatiently.

I believe that I am one of the most long-suffering of mortals;
but I'll admit that I was annoyed at the sardonic interruption.

"Really, Holmes," said I severely, "you are a little trying at times."

He was too much absorbed with his own thoughts to give any
immediate answer to my remonstrance. He leaned upon his
hand, with his untasted breakfast before him, and he stared at the
slip of paper which he had just drawn from its envelope. Then he
took the envelope itself, held it up to the light, and very carefully
studied both the exterior and the flap.

"It is Porlock's writing," said he thoughtfully. "I can hardly
doubt that it is Porlock's writing, though I have seen it only
twice before. The Greek e with the peculiar top flourish is
distinctive. But if it is Porlock, then it must be something of the
very first importance."

He was speaking to himself rather than to me; but my vexation
disappeared in the interest which the words awakened.

"Who then is Porlock?" I asked.

"Porlock, Watson, is a nom-de-plume, a mere identification
mark; but behind it lies a shifty and evasive personality. In a
former letter he frankly informed me that the name was not his
own, and defied me ever to trace him among the teeming millions
of this great city. Porlock is important, not for himself, but
for the great man with whom he is in touch. Picture to yourself
the pilot fish with the shark, the jackal with the lion -- anything
that is insignificant in companionship with what is formidable:
not only formidable, Watson, but sinister -- in the highest degree
sinister. That is where he comes within my purview. You have
heard me speak of Professor Moriarty?"

"The famous scientific criminal, as famous among crooks as --"

"My blushes, Watson!" Holmes murmured in a deprecating voice.

"I was about to say, as he is unknown to the public."

"A touch! A distinct touch!" cried Holmes. "You are developing
a certain unexpected vein of pawky humour, Watson, against
which I must learn to guard myself. But in calling Moriarty a
criminal you are uttering libel in the eyes of the law -- and
there lie the glory and the wonder of it! The greatest schemer
of all time, the organizer of every deviltry, the controlling
brain of the underworld, a brain which might have made or
marred the destiny of nations -- that's the man! But so aloof is he
from general suspicion, so immune from criticism, so admirable
in his management and self-effacement, that for those very words
that you have uttered he could hale you to a court and emerge
with your year's pension as a solatium for his wounded character.
Is he not the celebrated author of The Dynamics of an Asteroid,
a book which ascends to such rarefied heights of pure mathematics
that it is said that there was no man in the scientific
press capable of criticizing it? Is this a man to traduce? Foul-
mouthed doctor and slandered professor -- such would be your
respective roles! That's genius, Watson. But if I am spared by
lesser men, our day will surely come."

"May I be there to see!" I exclaimed devoutly. "But you
were speaking of this man Porlock."

"Ah, yes -- the so-called Porlock is a link in the chain some
little way from its great attachment. Porlock is not quite a sound
link -- between ourselves. He is the only flaw in that chain so far
as I have been able to test it."

"But no chain is stronger than its weakest link."

"Exactly, my dear Watson! Hence the extreme importance of Porlock.
Led on by some rudimentary aspirations towards right, and encouraged
by the judicious stimulation of an occasional ten-pound note sent to
him by devious methods, he has once or twice given me advance
information which has been of value -- that highest value which
anticipates and prevents rather than avenges crime. I cannot doubt
that, if we had the cipher, we should find that this communication
is of the nature that I indicate."

Again Holmes flattened out the paper upon his unused plate. I rose
and, leaning over him, stared down at the curious inscription,
which ran as follows:

         534 C2    13 127 36 31   4  17   21 41

           DOUGLAS 109 293  5  37   BIRLSTONE

             26   BIRLSTONE 9   47     171

"What do you make of it, Holmes?"

"It is obviously an attempt to convey secret information."

"But what is the use of a cipher message without the cipher?"

"In this instance, none at all."

"Why do you say 'in this instance'?"

"Because there are many ciphers which I would read as easily
as I do the apocrypha of the agony column: such crude devices
amuse the intelligence without fatiguing it. But this is different.
It is clearly a reference to the words in a page of some book.
Until I am told which page and which book I am powerless."

"But why 'Douglas' and 'Birlstone'?"

"Clearly because those are words which were not contained in
the page in question."

"Then why has he not indicated the book?"

"Your native shrewdness, my dear Watson, that innate cunning
which is the delight of your friends, would surely prevent
you from inclosing cipher and message in the same envelope.
Should it miscarry, you are undone. As it is, both have to go
wrong before any harm comes from it. Our second post is now
overdue, and I shall be surprised if it does not bring us either a
further letter of explanation, or, as is more probable, the very
volume to which these figures refer."

Holmes's calculation was fulfilled within a very few minutes
by the appearance of Billy, the page, with the very letter which
we were expecting.

"The same writing," remarked Holmes, as he opened the
envelope, "and actually signed," he added in an exultant voice
as he unfolded the epistle. "Come, we are getting on, Watson."
His brow clouded, however, as he glanced over the contents.

"Dear me, this is very disappointing! I fear, Watson, that all
our expectations come to nothing. I trust that the man Porlock
will come to no harm.

 "DEAR MR. HOLMES [he says]:

 "I will go no further in this matter. It is too dangerous -- he

 suspects me. I can see that he suspects me. He came to me

 quite unexpectedly after I had actually addressed this envelope

 with the intention of sending you the key to the cipher.

 I was able to cover it up. If he had seen it, it would have

 gone hard with me. But I read suspicion in his eyes. Please

 burn the cipher message, which can now be of no use to you.

                                              FRED PORLOCK."

Holmes sat for some little time twisting this letter between his
fingers, and frowning, as he stared into the fire.

"After all," he said at last, "there may be nothing in it. It
may be only his guilty conscience. Knowing himself to be a
traitor, he may have read the accusation in the other's eyes."

"The other being, I presume, Professor Moriarty."

"No less! When any of that party talk about 'He' you know whom
they mean. There is one predominant 'He' for all of them."

"But what can he do?"

"Hum! That's a large question. When you have one of the
first brains of Europe up against you, and all the powers of
darkness at his back, there are infinite possibilities. Anyhow,
Friend Porlock is evidently scared out of his senses -- kindly
compare the writing in the note to that upon its envelope; which
was done, he tells us, before this ill-omened visit. The one is
clear and firm. The other hardly legible."

"Why did he write at all? Why did he not simply drop it?"

"Because he feared I would make some inquiry after him in
that case, and possibly bring trouble on him."

"No doubt," said I. "Of course." I had picked up the original
cipher message and was bending my brows over it. "It's pretty
maddening to think that an important secret may lie here on this
slip of paper, and that it is beyond human power to penetrate it."

Sherlock Holmes had pushed away his untasted breakfast and
lit the unsavoury pipe which was the companion of his deepest
meditations. "I wonder!" said he, leaning back and staring at
the ceiling. "Perhaps there are points which have escaped your
Machiavellian intellect. Let us consider the problem in the light
of pure reason. This man's reference is to a book. That is our
point of departure."

"A somewhat vague one."

"Let us see then if we can narrow it down. As I focus my
mind upon it, it seems rather less impenetrable. What indications
have we as to this book?"

"None."

"Well, well, it is surely not quite so bad as that. The cipher
message begins with a large 534, does it not? We may take it as
a working hypothesis that 534 is the particular page to which the
cipher refers. So our book has already become a large book
which is surely something gained. What other indications have
we as to the nature of this large book? The next sign is C2.
What do you make of that, Watson?"

"Chapter the second, no doubt."

"Hardly that, Watson. You will, I am sure, agree with me
that if the page be given, the number of the chapter is immaterial.
Also that if page 534 finds us only in the second chapter,
the length of the first one must have been really intolerable."

"Column!" I cried.

"Brilliant, Watson. You are scintillating this morning. If it is
not column, then I am very much deceived. So now, you see, we
begin to visualize a large book printed in double columns
which are each of a considerable length, since one of the words
is numbered in the document as the two hundred and ninety-
third. Have we reached the limits of what reason can supply?"

"I fear that we have."

"Surely you do yourself an injustice. One more coruscation,
my dear Watson -- yet another brain-wave! Had the volume been
an unusual one, he would have sent it to me. Instead of that, he
had intended, before his plans were nipped, to send me the clue
in this envelope. He says so in his note. This would seem to
indicate that the book is one which he thought I would have no
difficulty in finding for myself. He had it -- and he imagined that
I would have it, too. In short, Watson, it is a very common book."

"What you say certainly sounds plausible."

"So we have contracted our field of search to a large book,
printed in double columns and in common use."

"The Bible!" I cried triumphantly.

"Good, Watson, good! But not, if I may say so, quite good enough!
Even if I accepted the compliment for myself I could hardly name
any volume which would be less likely to lie at the elbow of one
of Moriarty's associates. Besides, the editions of Holy Writ are
so numerous that he could hardly suppose that two copies would have
the same pagination. This is clearly a book which is standardized.
He knows for certain that his page 534 will exactly agree with my
page 534."

"But very few books would correspond with that."

"Exactly. Therein lies our salvation. Our search is narrowed down
to standardized books which anyone may be supposed to possess."

"Bradshaw!"

"There are difficulties, Watson. The vocabulary of Bradshaw is
nervous and terse, but limited. The selection of words would
hardly lend itself to the sending of general messages. We will
eliminate Bradshaw. The dictionary is, I fear, inadmissible for
the same reason. What then is left?"

"An almanac!"

"Excellent, Watson! I am very much mistaken if you have not
touched the spot. An almanac! Let us consider the claims of
Whitaker's Almanac. It is in common use. It has the requisite
number of pages. It is in double column. Though reserved in its
earlier vocabulary, it becomes, if I remember right, quite
garrulous towards the end." He picked the volume from his desk.
"Here is page 534, column two, a substantial block of print
dealing, I perceive, with the trade and resources of British India.
Jot down the words, Watson! Number thirteen is 'Mahratta.'
Not, I fear, a very auspicious beginning. Number one hundred
and twenty-seven is 'Government'; which at least makes sense,
though somewhat irrelevant to ourselves and Professor Moriarty.
Now let us try again. What does the Mahratta government do?
Alas! the next word is 'pig's-bristles.' We are undone, my good
Watson! It is finished!"

He had spoken in jesting vein, but the twitching of his bushy
eyebrows bespoke his disappointment and irritation. I sat helpless
and unhappy, staring into the fire. A long silence was broken by
a sudden exclamation from Holmes, who dashed at a cupboard, from
which he emerged with a second yellow-covered volume in his hand.

"We pay the price, Watson, for being too up-to-date!" he
cried. "We are before our time, and suffer the usual penalties.
Being the seventh of January, we have very properly laid in the
new almanac. It is more than likely that Porlock took his message
from the old one. No doubt he would have told us so had his
letter of explanation been written. Now let us see what page
534 has in store for us. Number thirteen is 'There,' which is
much more promising. Number one hundred and twenty-seven is
'is' -- 'There is'" -- Holmes's eyes were gleaming with excitement,
and his thin, nervous fingers twitched as he counted the
words -- "'danger.' Ha! Ha! Capital! Put that down, Watson.
'There is danger -- may -- come -- very -- soon -- one.' Then we have
the name 'Douglas' -- 'rich -- country -- now -- at -- Birlstone --
House -- Birlstone -- confidence -- is -- pressing.' There, Watson!
What do you think of pure reason and its fruit? If the greengrocer
had such a thing as a laurel wreath, I should send Billy round for
it."

I was staring at the strange message which I had scrawled,
as he deciphered it, upon a sheet of foolscap on my knee.

"What a queer, scrambling way of expressing his meaning!" said I.

"On the contrary, he has done quite remarkably well," said Holmes.
"When you search a single column for words with which to express
your meaning, you can hardly expect to get everything you want.
You are bound to leave something to the intelligence of your
correspondent. The purport is perfectly clear. Some deviltry is
intended against one Douglas, whoever he may be, residing as stated,
a rich country gentleman. He is sure -- 'confidence' was as near as
he could get to 'confident' -- that it is pressing. There is our
result -- and a very workmanlike little bit of analysis it was!"

Holmes had the impersonal joy of the true artist in his better
work, even as he mourned darkly when it fell below the high
level to which he aspired. He was still chuckling over his
success when Billy swung open the door and Inspector MacDonald
of Scotland Yard was ushered into the room.

Those were the early days at the end of the '80's, when Alec
MacDonald was far from having attained the national fame
which he has now achieved. He was a young but trusted member
of the detective force, who had distinguished himself in several
cases which had been entrusted to him. His tall, bony figure gave
promise of exceptional physical strength, while his great cranium
and deep-set, lustrous eyes spoke no less clearly of the keen
intelligence which twinkled out from behind his bushy eyebrows.
He was a silent, precise man with a dour nature and a hard
Aberdonian accent.

Twice already in his career had Holmes helped him to attain
success, his own sole reward being the intellectual joy of the
problem. For this reason the affection and respect of the
Scotchman for his amateur colleague were profound, and he showed
them by the frankness with which he consulted Holmes in every
difficulty. Mediocrity knows nothing higher than itself; but talent
instantly recognizes genius, and MacDonald had talent enough
for his profession to enable him to perceive that there was no
humiliation in seeking the assistance of one who already stood
alone in Europe, both in his gifts and in his experience. Holmes
was not prone to friendship, but he was tolerant of the big
Scotchman, and smiled at the sight of him.

"You are an early bird, Mr. Mac," said he. "I wish you luck with
your worm. I fear this means that there is some mischief afoot."

"If you said 'hope' instead of 'fear,' it would be nearer the
truth, I'm thinking, Mr. Holmes," the inspector answered, with a
knowing grin. "Well, maybe a wee nip would keep out the raw
morning chill. No, I won't smoke, I thank you. I'll have to be
pushing on my way; for the early hours of a case are the precious
ones, as no man knows better than your own self. But -- but --"

The inspector had stopped suddenly, and was staring with a
look of absolute amazement at a paper upon the table. It was the
sheet upon which I had scrawled the enigmatic message.

"Douglas!" he stammered. "Birlstone! What's this, Mr. Holmes?
Man, it's witchcraft! Where in the name of all that is wonderful
did you get those names?"

"It is a cipher that Dr. Watson and I have had occasion to
solve. But why -- what's amiss with the names?"

The inspector looked from one to the other of us in dazed astonishment.
"Just this," said he, "that Mr. Douglas of Birlstone Manor House was
horribly murdered last night!"



Chapter 2
Sherlock Holmes Discourses

It was one of those dramatic moments for which my friend existed.
It would be an overstatement to say that he was shocked or even
excited by the amazing announcement. Without having a tinge of
cruelty in his singular composition, he was undoubtedly callous
from long over-stimulation. Yet, if his emotions were dulled,
his intellectual perceptions were exceedingly active. There was
no trace then of the horror which I had myself felt at this curt
declaration; but his face showed rather the quiet and interested
composure of the chemist who sees the crystals falling into position
from his oversaturated solution.

"Remarkable!" said he. "Remarkable!"

"You don't seem surprised."

"Interested, Mr. Mac, but hardly surprised. Why should I be
surprised? I receive an anonymous communication from a quarter
which I know to be important, warning me that danger threatens
a certain person. Within an hour I learn that this danger has
actually materialized and that the person is dead. I am interested;
but, as you observe, I am not surprised."

In a few short sentences he explained to the inspector the facts
about the letter and the cipher. MacDonald sat with his chin on
his hands and his great sandy eyebrows bunched into a yellow
tangle.

"I was going down to Birlstone this morning," said he. "I
had come to ask you if you cared to come with me -- you and
your friend here. But from what you say we might perhaps be
doing better work in London."

"I rather think not," said Holmes.

"Hang it all, Mr. Holmes!" cried the inspector. "The papers
will be full of the Birlstone mystery in a day or two; but where's
the mystery if there is a man in London who prophesied the
crime before ever it occurred? We have only to lay our hands on
that man, and the rest will follow."

"No doubt, Mr. Mac. But how do you propose to lay your
hands on the so-called Porlock?"

MacDonald turned over the letter which Holmes had handed
him. "Posted in Camberwell -- that doesn't help us much. Name,
you say, is assumed. Not much to go on, certainly. Didn't you
say that you have sent him money?"

"Twice."

"And how?"

"In notes to Camberwell post-office."

"Did you ever trouble to see who called for them?"

"No."

The inspector looked surprised and a little shocked. "Why not?"

"Because I always keep faith. I had promised when he first
wrote that I would not try to trace him."

"You think there is someone behind him?"

"I know there is."

"This professor that I've heard you mention?"

"Exactly!"

Inspector MacDonald smiled, and his eyelid quivered as he
glanced towards me. "I won't conceal from you, Mr. Holmes,
that we think in the C. I. D. that you have a wee bit of a bee in
your bonnet over this professor. I made some inquiries myself
about the matter. He seems to be a very respectable, learned, and
talented sort of man."

"I'm glad you've got so far as to recognize the talent."

"Man, you can't but recognize it! After I heard your view I
made it my business to see him. I had a chat with him on
eclipses. How the talk got that way I canna think; but he had out
a reflector lantern and a globe, and made it all clear in a minute.
He lent me a book; but I don't mind saying that it was a bit
above my head, though I had a good Aberdeen upbringing. He'd
have made a grand meenister with his thin face and gray hair and
solemn-like way of talking. When he put his hand on my shoulder
as we were parting, it was like a father's blessing before you
go out into the cold, cruel world."

Holmes chuckled and rubbed his hands. "Great!" he said.
"Great! Tell me, Friend MacDonald, this pleasing and touching
interview was, I suppose, in the professor's study?"

"That's so."

"A fine room, is it not?"

"Very fine -- very handsome indeed, Mr. Holmes."

"You sat in front of his writing desk?"

"Just so."

"Sun in your eyes and his face in the shadow?"

"Well, it was evening; but I mind that the lamp was turned on
my face."

"It would be. Did you happen to observe a picture over the
professor's head?"

"I don't miss much, Mr. Holmes. Maybe I learned that from
you. Yes, I saw the picture -- a young woman with her head on
her hands, peeping at you sideways."

"That painting was by Jean Baptiste Greuze."

The inspector endeavoured to look interested.

"Jean Baptiste Greuze," Holmes continued, joining his finger
tips and leaning well back in his chair, "was a French artist who
flourished between the years 1750 and 1800. I allude, of course
to his working career. Modern criticism has more than indorsed
the high opinion formed of him by his contemporaries."

The inspector's eyes grew abstracted. "Hadn't we better --"
he said.

"We are doing so," Holmes interrupted. "All that I am
saying has a very direct and vital bearing upon what you have
called the Birlstone Mystery. In fact, it may in a sense be called
the very centre of it."

MacDonald smiled feebly, and looked appealingly to me.
"Your thoughts move a bit too quick for me, Mr. Holmes. You
leave out a link or two, and I can't get over the gap. What in the
whole wide world can be the connection between this dead
painting man and the affair at Birlstone?"

"All knowledge comes useful to the detective," remarked
Holmes. "Even the trivial fact that in the year 1865 a picture by
Greuze entitled La Jeune Fille a l'Agneau fetched one million
two hundred thousand francs -- more than forty thousand pounds --
at the Portalis sale may start a train of reflection in your mind."

It was clear that it did. The inspector looked honestly interested.

"I may remind you," Holmes continued, "that the professor's
salary can be ascertained in several trustworthy books of reference.
It is seven hundred a year."

"Then how could he buy --"

"Quite so! How could he?"

"Ay, that's remarkable," said the inspector thoughtfully. "Talk
away, Mr. Holmes. I'm just loving it. It's fine!"

Holmes smiled. He was always warmed by genuine admiration --
the characteristic of the real artist. "What about Birlstone?" he
asked.

"We've time yet," said the inspector, glancing at his watch.
"I've a cab at the door, and it won't take us twenty minutes to
Victoria. But about this picture: I thought you told me once, Mr.
Holmes, that you had never met Professor Moriarty."

"No, I never have."

"Then how do you know about his rooms?"

"Ah, that's another matter. I have been three times in his
rooms, twice waiting for him under different pretexts and leaving
before he came. Once -- well, I can hardly tell about the once to
an official detective. It was on the last occasion that I took the
liberty of running over his papers -- with the most unexpected
results."

"You found something compromising?"

"Absolutely nothing. That was what amazed me. However,
you have now seen the point of the picture. It shows him to be a
very wealthy man. How did he acquire wealth? He is unmarried.
His younger brother is a station master in the west of England.
His chair is worth seven hundred a year. And he owns a Greuze."

"Well?"

"Surely the inference is plain."

"You mean that he has a great income and that he must earn it
in an illegal fashion?"

"Exactly. Of course I have other reasons for thinking so --
dozens of exiguous threads which lead vaguely up towards the
centre of the web where the poisonous, motionless creature is
lurking. I only mention the Greuze because it brings the matter
within the range of your own observation."

"Well, Mr. Holmes, I admit that what you say is interesting:
it's more than interesting -- it's just wonderful. But let us have it
a little clearer if you can. Is it forgery, coining, burglary -- where
does the money come from?"

"Have you ever read of Jonathan Wild?"

"Well, the name has a familiar sound. Someone in a novel,
was he not? I don't take much stock of detectives in novels --
chaps that do things and never let you see how they do them.
That's just inspiration: not business."

"Jonathan Wild wasn't a detective, and he wasn't in a novel.
He was a master criminal, and he lived last century -- 1750 or
thereabouts."

"Then he's no use to me. I'm a practical man."

"Mr. Mac, the most practical thing that you ever did in your
life would be to shut yourself up for three months and read
twelve hours a day at the annals of crime. Everything comes in
circles -- even Professor Moriarty. Jonathan Wild was the hidden
force of the London criminals, to whom he sold his brains and
his organization on a fifteen per cent commission. The old
wheel turns, and the same spoke comes up. It's all been done
before, and will be again. I'll tell you one or two things about
Moriarty which may interest you."

"You'll interest me, right enough."

"I happen to know who is the first link in his chain -- a chain
with this Napoleon-gone-wrong at one end, and a hundred broken
fighting men, pickpockets, blackmailers, and card sharpers at the
other, with every sort of crime in between. His chief of staff is
Colonel Sebastian Moran, as aloof and guarded and inaccessible
to the law as himself. What do you think he pays him?"

"I'd like to hear."

"Six thousand a year. That's paying for brains, you see -- the
American business principle. I learned that detail quite by chance.
It's more than the Prime Minister gets. That gives you an idea of
Moriarty's gains and of the scale on which he works. Another
point: I made it my business to hunt down some of Moriarty's
checks lately -- just common innocent checks that he pays his
household bills with. They were drawn on six different banks.
Does that make any impression on your mind?"

"Queer, certainly! But what do you gather from it?"

"That he wanted no gossip about his wealth. No single man
should know what he had. I have no doubt that he has twenty
banking accounts; the bulk of his fortune abroad in the Deutsche
Bank or the Credit Lyonnais as likely as not. Sometime when
you have a year or two to spare I commend to you the study of
Professor Moriarty."

Inspector MacDonald had grown steadily more impressed as
the conversation proceeded. He had lost himself in his interest.
Now his practical Scotch intelligence brought him back with a
snap to the matter in hand.

"He can keep, anyhow," said he. "You've got us side-tracked
with your interesting anecdotes, Mr. Holmes. What really counts
is your remark that there is some connection between the professor
and the crime. That you get from the warning received through the
man Porlock. Can we for our present practical needs get any further
than that?"

"We may form some conception as to the motives of the crime.
It is, as I gather from your original remarks, an inexplicable,
or at least an unexplained, murder. Now, presuming that the
source of the crime is as we suspect it to be, there might be two
different motives. In the first place, I may tell you that Moriarty
rules with a rod of iron over his people. His discipline is
tremendous. There is only one punishment in his code. It is
death. Now we might suppose that this murdered man -- this
Douglas whose approaching fate was known by one of the
arch-criminal's subordinates -- had in some way betrayed the chief.
His punishment followed, and would be known to all -- if only to
put the fear of death into them."

"Well, that is one suggestion, Mr. Holmes."

"The other is that it has been engineered by Moriarty in the
ordinary course of business. Was there any robbery?"

"I have not heard."

"If so, it would, of course, be against the first hypothesis and
in favour of the second. Moriarty may have been engaged to
engineer it on a promise of part spoils, or he may have been paid
so much down to manage it. Either is possible. But whichever it
may be, or if it is some third combination, it is down at Birlstone
that we must seek the solution. I know our man too well to
suppose that he has left anything up here which may lead us to
him."

"Then to Birlstone we must go!" cried MacDonald, jumping
from his chair. "My word! it's later than I thought. I can give
you, gentlemen, five minutes for preparation, and that is all."

"And ample for us both," said Holmes, as he sprang up and
hastened to change from his dressing gown to his coat. "While
we are on our way, Mr. Mac, I will ask you to be good enough
to tell me all about it."

"All about it" proved to be disappointingly little, and yet
there was enough to assure us that the case before us might well
be worthy of the expert's closest attention. He brightened and
rubbed his thin hands together as he listened to the meagre but
remarkable details. A long series of sterile weeks lay behind us,
and here at last there was a fitting object for those remarkable
powers which, like all special gifts, become irksome to their
owner when they are not in use. That razor brain blunted and
rusted with inaction.

Sherlock Holmes's eyes glistened, his pale cheeks took a
warmer hue, and his whole eager face shone with an inward light
when the call for work reached him. Leaning forward in the cab,
he listened intently to MacDonald's short sketch of the problem
which awaited us in Sussex. The inspector was himself dependent,
as he explained to us, upon a scribbled account forwarded to him
by the milk train in the early hours of the morning. White
Mason, the local officer, was a personal friend, and hence
MacDonald had been notified much more promptly than is usual
at Scotland Yard when provincials need their assistance. It is a
very cold scent upon which the Metropolitan expert is generally
asked to run.


"DEAR INSPECTOR MACDONALD [said the letter which he read to us]:

"Official requisition for your services is in separate

envelope. This is for your private eye. Wire me what train in

the morning you can get for Birlstone, and I will meet it --

or have it met if I am too occupied. This case is a snorter.

Don't waste a moment in getting started. If you can bring

Mr. Holmes, please do so; for he will find something after

his own heart. We would think the whole thing had been

fixed up for theatrical effect if there wasn't a dead man in

the middle of it. My word! it is a snorter."


"Your friend seems to be no fool," remarked Holmes.

"No, sir, White Mason is a very live man, if I am any judge."

"Well, have you anything more?"

"Only that he will give us every detail when we meet."

"Then how did you get at Mr. Douglas and the fact that he
had been horribly murdered?"

"That was in the enclosed official report. It didn't say
'horrible': that's not a recognized official term. It gave the name
John Douglas. It mentioned that his injuries had been in the head,
from the discharge of a shotgun. It also mentioned the hour of
the alarm, which was close on to midnight last night. It added
that the case was undoubtedly one of murder, but that no arrest
had been made, and that the case was one which presented some
very perplexing and extraordinary features. That's absolutely all
we have at present, Mr. Holmes."

"Then, with your permission, we will leave it at that, Mr.
Mac. The temptation to form premature theories upon insufficient
data is the bane of our profession. I can see only two things
for certain at present -- a great brain in London, and a dead man
in Sussex. It's the chain between that we are going to trace."



Chapter 3
The Tragedy of Birlstone

Now for a moment I will ask leave to remove my own insignificant
personality and to describe events which occurred before we
arrived upon the scene by the light of knowledge which came to
us afterwards. Only in this way can I make the reader appreciate
the people concerned and the strange setting in which their fate
was cast.

The village of Birlstone is a small and very ancient cluster of
half-timbered cottages on the northern border of the county of
Sussex. For centuries it had remained unchanged; but within the
last few years its picturesque appearance and situation have
attracted a number of well-to-do residents, whose villas peep out
from the woods around. These woods are locally supposed to be
the extreme fringe of the great Weald forest, which thins away
until it reaches the northern chalk downs. A number of small
shops have come into being to meet the wants of the increased
population; so there seems some prospect that Birlstone may
soon grow from an ancient village into a modern town. It is the
centre for a considerable area of country, since Tunbridge Wells,
the nearest place of importance, is ten or twelve miles to the
eastward, over the borders of Kent.

About half a mile from the town, standing in an old park
famous for its huge beech trees, is the ancient Manor House of
Birlstone. Part of this venerable building dates back to the time
of the first crusade, when Hugo de Capus built a fortalice in the
centre of the estate, which had been granted to him by the Red
King. This was destroyed by fire in 1543, and some of its
smoke-blackened corner stones were used when, in Jacobean
times, a brick country house rose upon the ruins of the feudal
castle.

The Manor House, with its many gables and its small diamond-
paned windows, was still much as the builder had left it in the
early seventeenth century. Of the double moats which had guarded
its more warlike predecessor, the outer had been allowed to dry
up, and served the humble function of a kitchen garden. The
inner one was still there, and lay forty feet in breadth, though
now only a few feet in depth, round the whole house. A small
stream fed it and continued beyond it, so that the sheet of water,
though turbid, was never ditch-like or unhealthy. The ground
floor windows were within a foot of the surface of the water.

The only approach to the house was over a drawbridge, the
chains and windlass of which had long been rusted and broken.
The latest tenants of the Manor House had, however, with
characteristic energy, set this right, and the drawbridge was not
only capable of being raised, but actually was raised every
evening and lowered every morning. By thus renewing the custom
of the old feudal days the Manor House was converted into
an island during the night -- a fact which had a very direct
bearing upon the mystery which was soon to engage the attention
of all England.

The house had been untenanted for some years and was
threatening to moulder into a picturesque decay when the
Douglases took possession of it. This family consisted of only
two individuals -- John Douglas and his wife. Douglas was a
remarkable man, both in character and in person. In age he may
have been about fifty, with a strong-jawed, rugged face, a
grizzling moustache, peculiarly keen gray eyes, and a wiry,
vigorous figure which had lost nothing of the strength and
activity of youth. He was cheery and genial to all, but somewhat
offhand in his manners, giving the impression that he had seen
life in social strata on some far lower horizon than the county
society of Sussex.

Yet, though looked at with some curiosity and reserve by his
more cultivated neighbours, he soon acquired a great popularity
among the villagers, subscribing handsomely to all local objects,
and attending their smoking concerts and other functions, where,
having a remarkably rich tenor voice, he was always ready to
oblige with an excellent song. He appeared to have plenty of
money, which was said to have been gained in the California
gold fields, and it was clear from his own talk and that of his
wife that he had spent a part of his life in America.

The good impression which had been produced by his generosity
and by his democratic manners was increased by a reputation
gained for utter indifference to danger. Though a wretched
rider, he turned out at every meet, and took the most amazing
falls in his determination to hold his own with the best. When
the vicarage caught fire he distinguished himself also by the
fearlessness with which he reentered the building to save property,
after the local fire brigade had given it up as impossible.
Thus it came about that John Douglas of the Manor House had
within five years won himself quite a reputation in Birlstone.

His wife, too, was popular with those who had made her
acquaintance; though, after the English fashion, the callers upon
a stranger who settled in the county without introductions were
few and far between. This mattered the less to her, as she was
retiring by disposition, and very much absorbed, to all appearance,
in her husband and her domestic duties. It was known that
she was an English lady who had met Mr. Douglas in London,
he being at that time a widower. She was a beautiful woman,
tall, dark, and slender, some twenty years younger than her
husband, a disparity which seemed in no wise to mar the
contentment of their family life.

It was remarked sometimes, however, by those who knew
them best, that the confidence between the two did not appear to
be complete, since the wife was either very reticent about her
husband's past life, or else, as seemed more likely, was imperfectly
informed about it. It had also been noted and commented upon by a
few observant people that there were signs sometimes of some
nerve-strain upon the part of Mrs. Douglas, and that she would
display acute uneasiness if her absent husband should ever be
particularly late in his return. On a quiet countryside, where
all gossip is welcome, this weakness of the lady of the Manor
House did not pass without remark, and it bulked larger upon
people's memory when the events arose which gave it a very
special significance.

There was yet another individual whose residence under that
roof was, it is true, only an intermittent one, but whose presence
at the time of the strange happenings which will now be narrated
brought his name prominently before the public. This was Cecil
James Barker, of Hales Lodge, Hampstead.

Cecil Barker's tall, loose-jointed figure was a familiar one in
the main street of Birlstone village; for he was a frequent and
welcome visitor at the Manor House. He was the more noticed as
being the only friend of the past unknown life of Mr. Douglas
who was ever seen in his new English surroundings. Barker was
himself an undoubted Englishman; but by his remarks it was
clear that he had first known Douglas in America and had there
lived on intimate terms with him. He appeared to be a man of
considerable wealth, and was reputed to be a bachelor.

In age he was rather younger than Douglas -- forty-five at the
most -- a tall, straight, broad-chested fellow with a clean-shaved,
prize-fighter face, thick, strong, black eyebrows, and a pair of
masterful black eyes which might, even without the aid of his
very capable hands, clear a way for him through a hostile crowd.
He neither rode nor shot, but spent his days in wandering round
the old village with his pipe in his mouth, or in driving with his
host, or in his absence with his hostess, over the beautiful
countryside. "An easy-going, free-handed gentleman," said Ames,
the butler. "But, my word! I had rather not be the man that
crossed him!" He was cordial and intimate with Douglas, and he
was no less friendly with his wife -- a friendship which more than
once seemed to cause some irritation to the husband, so that even
the servants were able to perceive his annoyance. Such was the
third person who was one of the family when the catastrophe
occurred.

As to the other denizens of the old building, it will suffice out
of a large household to mention the prim, respectable, and
capable Ames, and Mrs. Allen, a buxom and cheerful person,
who relieved the lady of some of her household cares. The other
six servants in the house bear no relation to the events of the
night of January 6th.

It was at eleven forty-five that the first alarm reached the small
local police station, in charge of Sergeant Wilson of the Sussex
Constabulary. Cecil Barker, much excited, had rushed up to the
door and pealed furiously upon the bell. A terrible tragedy had
occurred at the Manor House, and John Douglas had been murdered.
That was the breathless burden of his message. He had hurried back
to the house, followed within a few minutes by the police sergeant,
who arrived at the scene of the crime a little after twelve o'clock,
after taking prompt steps to warn the county authorities that
something serious was afoot.

On reaching the Manor House, the sergeant had found the
drawbridge down, the windows lighted up, and the whole household
in a state of wild confusion and alarm. The white-faced servants
were huddling together in the hall, with the frightened butler
wringing his hands in the doorway. Only Cecil Barker seemed to
be master of himself and his emotions; he had opened the door
which was nearest to the entrance and he had beckoned to the
sergeant to follow him. At that moment there arrived Dr. Wood,
a brisk and capable general practitioner from the village. The
three men entered the fatal room together, while the horror-
stricken butler followed at their heels, closing the door behind
him to shut out the terrible scene from the maid servants.

The dead man lay on his back, sprawling with outstretched
limbs in the centre of the room. He was clad only in a pink
dressing gown, which covered his night clothes. There were
carpet slippers on his bare feet. The doctor knelt beside him and
held down the hand lamp which had stood on the table. One
glance at the victim was enough to show the healer that his
presence could be dispensed with. The man had been horribly
injured. Lying across his chest was a curious weapon, a shotgun
with the barrel sawed off a foot in front of the triggers. It was
clear that this had been fired at close range and that he had
received the whole charge in the face, blowing his head almost
to pieces. The triggers had been wired together, so as to make
the simultaneous discharge more destructive.

The country policeman was unnerved and troubled by the
tremendous responsibility which had come so suddenly upon
him. "We will touch nothing until my superiors arrive," he said
in a hushed voice, staring in horror at the dreadful head.

"Nothing has been touched up to now," said Cecil Barker.
"I'll answer for that. You see it all exactly as I found it."

"When was that?" The sergeant had drawn out his notebook.

"It was just half-past eleven. I had not begun to undress, and I
was sitting by the fire in my bedroom when I heard the report. It
was not very loud -- it seemed to be muffled. I rushed down -- I
don't suppose it was thirty seconds before I was in the room."

"Was the door open?"

"Yes, it was open. Poor Douglas was lying as you see him.
His bedroom candle was burning on the table. It was I who lit
the lamp some minutes afterward."

"Did you see no one?"

"No. I heard Mrs. Douglas coming down the stair behind me,
and I rushed out to prevent her from seeing this dreadful sight.
Mrs. Allen, the housekeeper, came and took her away. Ames
had arrived, and we ran back into the room once more."

"But surely I have heard that the drawbridge is kept up all
night."

"Yes, it was up until I lowered it."

"Then how could any murderer have got away? It is out of the
question! Mr. Douglas must have shot himself."

"That was our first idea. But see!" Barker drew aside the
curtain, and showed that the long, diamond-paned window was
open to its full extent. "And look at this!" He held the lamp
down and illuminated a smudge of blood like the mark of a
boot-sole upon the wooden sill. "Someone has stood there in
getting out."

"You mean that someone waded across the moat?"

"Exactly!"

"Then if you were in the room within half a minute of the
crime, he must have been in the water at that very moment."

"I have not a doubt of it. I wish to heaven that I had rushed to
the window! But the curtain screened it, as you can see, and so it
never occurred to me. Then I heard the step of Mrs. Douglas,
and I could not let her enter the room. It would have been too
horrible."

"Horrible enough!" said the doctor, looking at the shattered
head and the terrible marks which surrounded it. "I've never
seen such injuries since the Birlstone railway smash."

"But, I say," remarked the police sergeant, whose slow,
bucolic common sense was still pondering the open window.
"It's all very well your saying that a man escaped by wading this
moat, but what I ask you is, how did he ever get into the house
at all if the bridge was up?"

"Ah, that's the question," said Barker.

"At what o'clock was it raised?"

"It was nearly six o'clock," said Ames, the butler.

"I've heard," said the sergeant, "that it was usually raised at
sunset. That would be nearer half-past four than six at this time
of year."

"Mrs. Douglas had visitors to tea," said Ames. "I couldn't
raise it until they went. Then I wound it up myself."

"Then it comes to this," said the sergeant: "If anyone came
from outside -- if they did -- they must have got in across the
bridge before six and been in hiding ever since, until Mr.
Douglas came into the room after eleven."

"That is so! Mr. Douglas went round the house every night
the last thing before he turned in to see that the lights were right.
That brought him in here. The man was waiting and shot him.
Then he got away through the window and left his gun behind
him. That's how I read it; for nothing else will fit the facts."

The sergeant picked up a card which lay beside the dead man
on the floor. The initials V. V. and under them the number 341
were rudely scrawled in ink upon it.

"What's this?" he asked, holding it up.

Barker looked at it with curiosity. "I never noticed it before,"
he said. "The murderer must have left it behind him."

"V. V. -- 341. I can make no sense of that."

The sergeant kept turning it over in his big fingers. "What's
V. V.? Somebody's initials, maybe. What have you got there,
Dr. Wood?"

It was a good-sized hammer which had been lying on the rug
in front of the fireplace -- a substantial, workmanlike hammer.
Cecil Barker pointed to a box of brass-headed nails upon the
mantelpiece.

"Mr. Douglas was altering the pictures yesterday," he said.
"I saw him myself, standing upon that chair and fixing the big
picture above it. That accounts for the hammer."

"We'd best put it back on the rug where we found it," said
the sergeant, scratching his puzzled head in his perplexity. "It
will want the best brains in the force to get to the bottom of this
thing. It will be a London job before it is finished." He raised
the hand lamp and walked slowly round the room. "Hullo!" he
cried, excitedly, drawing the window curtain to one side. "What
o'clock were those curtains drawn?"

"When the lamps were lit," said the butler. "It would be
shortly after four."

"Someone had been hiding here, sure enough." He held down
the light, and the marks of muddy boots were very visible in the
corner. "I'm bound to say this bears out your theory, Mr.
Barker. It looks as if the man got into the house after four when
the curtains were drawn and before six when the bridge was
raised. He slipped into this room, because it was the first that he
saw. There was no other place where he could hide, so he
popped in behind this curtain. That all seems clear enough. It is
likely that his main idea was to burgle the house; but Mr.
Douglas chanced to come upon him, so he murdered him and
escaped."

"That's how I read it," said Barker. "But, I say, aren't we
wasting precious time? Couldn't we start out and scour the
country before the fellow gets away?"

The sergeant considered for a moment.

"There are no trains before six in the morning; so he can't get
away by rail. If he goes by road with his legs all dripping, it's
odds that someone will notice him. Anyhow, I can't leave here
myself until I am relieved. But I think none of you should go
until we see more clearly how we all stand."

The doctor had taken the lamp and was narrowly scrutinizing
the body. "What's this mark?" he asked. "Could this have any
connection with the crime?"

The dead man's right arm was thrust out from his dressing
gown, and exposed as high as the elbow. About halfway up the
forearm was a curious brown design, a triangle inside a circle,
standing out in vivid relief upon the lard-coloured skin.

"It's not tattooed," said the doctor, peering through his glasses.
"I never saw anything like it. The man has been branded at
some time as they brand cattle. What is the meaning of this?"

"I don't profess to know the meaning of it," said Cecil
Barker; "but I have seen the mark on Douglas many times this
last ten years."

"And so have I," said the butler. "Many a time when the
master has rolled up his sleeves I have noticed that very mark.
I've often wondered what it could be."

"Then it has nothing to do with the crime, anyhow," said the
sergeant. "But it's a rum thing all the same. Everything about
this case is rum. Well, what is it now?"

The butler had given an exclamation of astonishment and was
pointing at the dead man's outstretched hand.

"They've taken his wedding ring!" he gasped.

"What!"

"Yes, indeed. Master always wore his plain gold wedding ring
on the little finger of his left hand. That ring with the rough
nugget on it was above it, and the twisted snake ring on the third
finger. There's the nugget and there's the snake, but the wedding
ring is gone."

"He's right," said Barker.

"Do you tell me," said the sergeant, "that the wedding ring
was below the other?"

"Always!"

"Then the murderer, or whoever it was, first took off this ring
you call the nugget ring, then the wedding ring, and afterwards
put the nugget ring back again."

"That is so!"

The worthy country policeman shook his head. "Seems to me
the sooner we get London on to this case the better," said he.
"White Mason is a smart man. No local job has ever been too
much for White Mason. It won't be long now before he is here
to help us. But I expect we'll have to look to London before we
are through. Anyhow, I'm not ashamed to say that it is a deal too
thick for the likes of me."



Chapter 4
Darkness

At three in the morning the chief Sussex detective, obeying
the urgent call from Sergeant Wilson of Birlstone, arrived from
headquarters in a light dog-cart behind a breathless trotter. By
the five-forty train in the morning he had sent his message to
Scotland Yard, and he was at the Birlstone station at twelve
o'clock to welcome us. White Mason was a quiet, comfortable-
looking person in a loose tweed suit, with a clean-shaved, ruddy
face, a stoutish body, and powerful bandy legs adorned with
gaiters, looking like a small farmer, a retired gamekeeper, or
anything upon earth except a very favourable specimen of the
provincial criminal officer.

"A real downright snorter, Mr. MacDonald!" he kept repeating.
"We'll have the pressmen down like flies when they understand it.
I'm hoping we will get our work done before they get poking their
noses into it and messing up all the trails. There has been
nothing like this that I can remember. There are some bits
that will come home to you, Mr. Holmes, or I am mistaken. And
you also, Dr. Watson; for the medicos will have a word to say
before we finish. Your room is at the Westville Arms. There's
no other place; but I hear that it is clean and good. The man will
carry your bags. This way, gentlemen, if you please."

He was a very bustling and genial person, this Sussex detective.
In ten minutes we had all found our quarters. In ten more we were
seated in the parlour of the inn and being treated to a rapid
sketch of those events which have been outlined in the previous
chapter. MacDonald made an occasional note, while Holmes sat
absorbed, with the expression of surprised and reverent admiration
with which the botanist surveys the rare and precious bloom.

"Remarkable!" he said, when the story was unfolded, "most
remarkable! I can hardly recall any case where the features have
been more peculiar."

"I thought you would say so, Mr. Holmes," said White
Mason in great delight. "We're well up with the times in
Sussex. I've told you now how matters were, up to the time
when I took over from Sergeant Wilson between three and four
this morning. My word! I made the old mare go! But I need not
have been in such a hurry, as it turned out; for there was nothing
immediate that I could do. Sergeant Wilson had all the facts. I
checked them and considered them and maybe added a few of
my own."

"What were they?" asked Holmes eagerly.

"Well, I first had the hammer examined. There was Dr.
Wood there to help me. We found no signs of violence upon it. I
was hoping that if Mr. Douglas defended himself with the hammer,
he might have left his mark upon the murderer before he dropped
it on the mat. But there was no stain."

"That, of course, proves nothing at all," remarked Inspector
MacDonald. "There has been many a hammer murder and no
trace on the hammer."

"Quite so. It doesn't prove it wasn't used. But there might
have been stains, and that would have helped us. As a matter of
fact there were none. Then I examined the gun. They were
buckshot cartridges, and, as Sergeant Wilson pointed out, the
triggers were wired together so that, if you pulled on the hinder
one, both barrels were discharged. Whoever fixed that up had
made up his mind that he was going to take no chances of
missing his man. The sawed gun was not more than two foot
long -- one could carry it easily under one's coat. There was no
complete maker's name; but the printed letters P-E-N were on the
fluting between the barrels, and the rest of the name had been cut
off by the saw."

"A big P with a flourish above it, E and N smaller?" asked
Holmes.

"Exactly."

"Pennsylvania Small Arms Company -- well-known American
firm," said Holmes.

White Mason gazed at my friend as the little village
practitioner looks at the Harley Street specialist who by
a word can solve the difficulties that perplex him.

"That is very helpful, Mr. Holmes. No doubt you are right.
Wonderful! Wonderful! Do you carry the names of all the gun
makers in the world in your memory?"

Holmes dismissed the subject with a wave.

"No doubt it is an American shotgun," White Mason continued.
"I seem to have read that a sawed-off shotgun is a weapon
used in some parts of America. Apart from the name upon the
barrel, the idea had occurred to me. There is some evidence
then, that this man who entered the house and killed its master
was an American."

MacDonald shook his head. "Man, you are surely travelling
overfast," said he. "I have heard no evidence yet that any
stranger was ever in the house at all."

"The open window, the blood on the sill, the queer card, the
marks of boots in the corner, the gun!"

"Nothing there that could not have been arranged. Mr. Douglas
was an American, or had lived long in America. So had Mr.
Barker. You don't need to import an American from outside in
order to account for American doings."

"Ames, the butler --"

"What about him? Is he reliable?"

"Ten years with Sir Charles Chandos -- as solid as a rock. He
has been with Douglas ever since he took the Manor House five
years ago. He has never seen a gun of this sort in the house."

"The gun was made to conceal. That's why the barrels were
sawed. It would fit into any box. How could he swear there was
no such gun in the house?"

"Well, anyhow, he had never seen one."

MacDonald shook his obstinate Scotch head. "I'm not
convinced yet that there was ever anyone in the house," said he.
"I'm asking you to conseedar" (his accent became more
Aberdonian as he lost himself in his argument) "I'm asking you
to conseedar what it involves if you suppose that this gun was
ever brought into the house, and that all these strange things
were done by a person from outside. Oh, man, it's just
inconceivable! It's clean against common sense! I put it to you,
Mr. Holmes, judging it by what we have heard."

"Well, state your case, Mr. Mac," said Holmes in his most
judicial style.

"The man is not a burglar, supposing that he ever existed.
The ring business and the card point to premeditated murder for
some private reason. Very good. Here is a man who slips into a
house with the deliberate intention of committing murder. He
knows, if he knows anything, that he will have a deeficulty in
making his escape, as the house is surrounded with water. What
weapon would he choose? You would say the most silent in the
world. Then he could hope when the deed was done to slip
quickly from the window, to wade the moat, and to get away at
his leisure. That's understandable. But is it understandable that
he should go out of his way to bring with him the most noisy
weapon he could select, knowing well that it will fetch every
human being in the house to the spot as quick as they can run,
and that it is all odds that he will be seen before he can get
across the moat? Is that credible, Mr. Holmes?"

"Well, you put the case strongly," my friend replied
thoughtfully. "It certainly needs a good deal of justification.
May I ask, Mr. White Mason, whether you examined the farther side
of the moat at once to see if there were any signs of the man
having climbed out from the water?"

"There were no signs, Mr. Holmes. But it is a stone ledge,
and one could hardly expect them."

"No tracks or marks?"

"None."

"Ha! Would there be any objection, Mr. White Mason, to
our going down to the house at once? There may possibly be some
small point which might be suggestive."

"I was going to propose it, Mr. Holmes; but I thought it well
to put you in touch with all the facts before we go. I suppose if
anything should strike you --" White Mason looked doubtfully
at the amateur.

"I have worked with Mr. Holmes before," said Inspector
MacDonald. "He plays the game."

"My own idea of the game, at any rate," said Holmes, with a
smile. "I go into a case to help the ends of justice and the work
of the police. If I have ever separated myself from the official
force, it is because they have first separated themselves from me.
I have no wish ever to score at their expense. At the same time,
Mr. White Mason, I claim the right to work in my own way and
give my results at my own time -- complete rather than in stages."

"I am sure we are honoured by your presence and to show
you all we know," said White Mason cordially. "Come along,
Dr. Watson, and when the time comes we'll all hope for a place
in your book."

We walked down the quaint village street with a row of
pollarded elms on each side of it. Just beyond were two ancient
stone pillars, weather-stained and lichen-blotched bearing upon
their summits a shapeless something which had once been the
rampant lion of Capus of Birlstone. A short walk along the
winding drive with such sward and oaks around it as one only
sees in rural England, then a sudden turn, and the long, low
Jacobean house of dingy, liver-coloured brick lay before us, with
an old-fashioned garden of cut yews on each side of it. As we
approached it, there was the wooden drawbridge and the beautiful
broad moat as still and luminous as quicksilver in the cold,
winter sunshine.

Three centuries had flowed past the old Manor House, centuries
of births and of homecomings, of country dances and of the meetings
of fox hunters. Strange that now in its old age this dark business
should have cast its shadow upon the venerable walls! And yet
those strange, peaked roofs and quaint, overhung gables were a
fitting covering to grim and terrible intrigue. As I looked
at the deep-set windows and the long sweep of the dull-coloured,
water-lapped front, I felt that no more fitting scene could be set
for such a tragedy.

"That's the window," said White Mason, "that one on the
immediate right of the drawbridge. It's open just as it was found
last night."

"It looks rather narrow for a man to pass."

"Well, it wasn't a fat man, anyhow. We don't need your
deductions, Mr. Holmes, to tell us that. But you or I could
squeeze through all right."

Holmes walked to the edge of the moat and looked across.
Then he examined the stone ledge and the grass border beyond
it.

"I've had a good look, Mr. Holmes," said White Mason.
"There is nothing there, no sign that anyone has landed -- but
why should he leave any sign?"

"Exactly. Why should he? Is the water always turbid?"

"Generally about this colour. The stream brings down the
clay."

"How deep is it?"

"About two feet at each side and three in the middle."

"So we can put aside all idea of the man having been drowned
in crossing."

"No, a child could not be drowned in it."

We walked across the drawbridge, and were admitted by a
quaint, gnarled, dried-up person, who was the butler, Ames. The
poor old fellow was white and quivering from the shock. The
village sergeant, a tall, formal, melancholy man, still held his
vigil in the room of Fate. The doctor had departed.

"Anything fresh, Sergeant Wilson?" asked White Mason.

"No, sir."

"Then you can go home. You've had enough. We can send
for you if we want you. The butler had better wait outside. Tell
him to warn Mr. Cecil Barker, Mrs. Douglas, and the housekeeper
that we may want a word with them presently. Now, gentlemen,
perhaps you will allow me to give you the views I have formed
first, and then you will be able to arrive at your own."

He impressed me, this country specialist. He had a solid grip
of fact and a cool, clear, common-sense brain, which should take
him some way in his profession. Holmes listened to him intently,
with no sign of that impatience which the official exponent too
often produced.

"Is it suicide, or is it murder -- that's our first question,
gentlemen, is it not? If it were suicide, then we have to believe
that this man began by taking off his wedding ring and concealing
it; that he then came down here in his dressing gown, trampled mud
into a corner behind the curtain in order to give the idea someone
had waited for him, opened the window, put blood on the --"

"We can surely dismiss that," said MacDonald.

"So I think. Suicide is out of the question. Then a murder has
been done. What we have to determine is, whether it was done
by someone outside or inside the house."

"Well, let's hear the argument."

"There are considerable difficulties both ways, and yet one or
the other it must be. We will suppose first that some person or
persons inside the house did the crime. They got this man down
here at a time when everything was still and yet no one was
asleep. They then did the deed with the queerest and noisiest
weapon in the world so as to tell everyone what had happened -- a
weapon that was never seen in the house before. That does not
seem a very likely start, does it?"

"No, it does not."

"Well, then, everyone is agreed that after the alarm was given
only a minute at the most had passed before the whole household --
not Mr. Cecil Barker alone, though he claims to have been the
first, but Ames and all of them were on the spot. Do you tell me
that in that time the guilty person managed to make footmarks in
the corner, open the window, mark the sill with blood, take the
wedding ring off the dead man's finger, and all the rest of it? It's
impossible!"

"You put it very clearly," said Holmes. "I am inclined to
agree with you."

"Well, then, we are driven back to the theory that it was done
by someone from outside. We are still faced with some big
difficulties; but anyhow they have ceased to be impossibilities.
The man got into the house between four-thirty and six; that is to
say, between dusk and the time when the bridge was raised.
There had been some visitors, and the door was open; so there
was nothing to prevent him. He may have been a common
burglar, or he may have had some private grudge against Mr.
Douglas. Since Mr. Douglas has spent most of his life in America,
and this shotgun seems to be an American weapon, it would
seem that the private grudge is the more likely theory. He
slipped into this room because it was the first he came to, and he
hid behind the curtain. There he remained until past eleven at
night. At that time Mr. Douglas entered the room. It was a short
interview, if there were any interview at all; for Mrs. Douglas
declares that her husband had not left her more than a few
minutes when she heard the shot."

"The candle shows that," said Holmes.

"Exactly. The candle, which was a new one, is not burned
more than half an inch. He must have placed it on the table
before he was attacked; otherwise, of course, it would have
fallen when he fell. This shows that he was not attacked the
instant that he entered the room. When Mr. Barker arrived the
candle was lit and the lamp was out."

"That's all clear enough."

"Well, now, we can reconstruct things on those lines. Mr.
Douglas enters the room. He puts down the candle. A man
appears from behind the curtain. He is armed with this gun. He
demands the wedding ring -- Heaven only knows why, but so it
must have been. Mr. Douglas gave it up. Then either in cold
blood or in the course of a struggle -- Douglas may have gripped
the hammer that was found upon the mat -- he shot Douglas in
this horrible way. He dropped his gun and also it would seem
this queer card -- V. V. 341, whatever that may mean -- and he
made his escape through the window and across the moat at the
very moment when Cecil Barker was discovering the crime.
How's that, Mr. Holmes?"

"Very interesting, but just a little unconvincing."

"Man, it would be absolute nonsense if it wasn't that anything
else is even worse!" cried MacDonald. "Somebody killed the
man, and whoever it was I could clearly prove to you that he
should have done it some other way. What does he mean by
allowing his retreat to be cut off like that? What does he mean by
using a shotgun when silence was his one chance of escape?
Come, Mr. Holmes, it's up to you to give us a lead, since you
say Mr. White Mason's theory is unconvincing."

Holmes had sat intently observant during this long discussion,
missing no word that was said, with his keen eyes darting to
right and to left, and his forehead wrinkled with speculation.

"I should like a few more facts before I get so far as a theory,
Mr. Mac," said he, kneeling down beside the body. "Dear me!
these injuries are really appalling. Can we have the butler in for
a moment? . . . Ames, I understand that you have often seen this
very unusual mark -- a branded triangle inside a circle -- upon Mr.
Douglas's forearm?"

"Frequently, sir."

"You never heard any speculation as to what it meant?"

"No, sir."

"It must have caused great pain when it was inflicted. It is
undoubtedly a burn. Now, I observe, Ames, that there is a small
piece of plaster at the angle of Mr. Douglas's jaw. Did you
observe that in life?"

"Yes, sir, he cut himself in shaving yesterday morning."

"Did you ever know him to cut himself in shaving before?"

"Not for a very long time, sir."

"Suggestive!" said Holmes. "It may, of course, be a mere
coincidence, or it may point to some nervousness which would
indicate that he had reason to apprehend danger. Had you
noticed anything unusual in his conduct, yesterday, Ames?"

"It struck me that he was a little restless and excited, sir."

"Ha! The attack may not have been entirely unexpected. We
do seem to make a little progress, do we not? Perhaps you would
rather do the questioning, Mr. Mac?"

"No, Mr. Holmes, it's in better hands than mine."

"Well, then, we will pass to this card -- V. V. 341. It is rough
cardboard. Have you any of the sort in the house?"

"I don't think so."

Holmes walked across to the desk and dabbed a little ink from
each bottle on to the blotting paper. "It was not printed in this
room," he said; "this is black ink and the other purplish. It was
done by a thick pen, and these are fine. No, it was done
elsewhere, I should say. Can you make anything of the inscription,
Ames?"

"No, sir, nothing."

"What do you think, Mr. Mac?"

"It gives me the impression of a secret society of some sort;
the same with his badge upon the forearm."

"That's my idea, too," said White Mason.

"Well, we can adopt it as a working hypothesis and then see
how far our difficulties disappear. An agent from such a society
makes his way into the house, waits for Mr. Douglas, blows his
head nearly off with this weapon, and escapes by wading the
moat, after leaving a card beside the dead man, which will
when mentioned in the papers, tell other members of the society
that vengeance has been done. That all hangs together. But why
this gun, of all weapons?"

"Exactly."

"And why the missing ring?"

"Quite so."

"And why no arrest? It's past two now. I take it for granted
that since dawn every constable within forty miles has been
looking out for a wet stranger?"

"That is so, Mr. Holmes."

"Well, unless he has a burrow close by or a change of clothes
ready, they can hardly miss him. And yet they have missed him
up to now!" Holmes had gone to the window and was examining
with his lens the blood mark on the sill. "It is clearly the tread of
a shoe. It is remarkably broad; a splay-foot, one would say.
Curious, because, so far as one can trace any footmark in this
mud-stained corner, one would say it was a more shapely sole.
However, they are certainly very indistinct. What's this under
the side table?"

"Mr. Douglas's dumb-bells," said Ames.

"Dumb-bell -- there's only one. Where's the other?"

"I don't know, Mr. Holmes. There may have been only one. I
have not noticed them for months."

"One dumb-bell -- " Holmes said seriously; but his remarks
were interrupted by a sharp knock at the door.

A tall, sunburned, capable-looking, clean-shaved man looked
in at us. I had no difficulty in guessing that it was the Cecil
Barker of whom I had heard. His masterful eyes travelled quickly
with a questioning glance from face to face.

"Sorry to interrupt your consultation," said he, "but you
should hear the latest news."

"An arrest?"

"No such luck. But they've found his bicycle. The fellow left
his bicycle behind him. Come and have a look. It is within a
hundred yards of the hall door."

We found three or four grooms and idlers standing in the drive
inspecting a bicycle which had been drawn out from a clump of
evergreens in which it had been concealed. It was a well used
Rudge-Whitworth, splashed as from a considerable journey. There
was a saddlebag with spanner and oilcan, but no clue as to the
owner.

"It would be a grand help to the police," said the inspector,
"if these things were numbered and registered. But we must be
thankful for what we've got. If we can't find where he went to,
at least we are likely to get where he came from. But what in the
name of all that is wonderful made the fellow leave it behind?
And how in the world has he got away without it? We don't
seem to get a gleam of light in the case, Mr. Holmes."

"Don't we?" my friend answered thoughtfully. "I wonder!"



Chapter 5
The People Of the Drama

"Have you seen all you want of the study?" asked White Mason
as we reentered the house.

"For the time," said the inspector, and Holmes nodded.

"Then perhaps you would now like to hear the evidence of
some of the people in the house. We could use the dining-room,
Ames. Please come yourself first and tell us what you know."

The butler's account was a simple and a clear one, and he
gave a convincing impression of sincerity. He had been engaged
five years before, when Douglas first came to Birlstone. He
understood that Mr. Douglas was a rich gentleman who had
made his money in America. He had been a kind and considerate
employer -- not quite what Ames was used to, perhaps; but one
can't have everything. He never saw any signs of apprehension
in Mr. Douglas: on the contrary, he was the most fearless man
he had ever known. He ordered the drawbridge to be pulled up
every night because it was the ancient custom of the old house,
and he liked to keep the old ways up.

Mr. Douglas seldom went to London or left the village; but on
the day before the crime he had been shopping at Tunbridge
Wells. He (Ames) had observed some restlessness and excitement
on the part of Mr. Douglas that day; for he had seemed
impatient and irritable, which was unusual with him. He had not
gone to bed that night; but was in the pantry at the back of the
house, putting away the silver, when he heard the bell ring
violently. He heard no shot; but it was hardly possible he would,
as the pantry and kitchens were at the very back of the house and
there were several closed doors and a long passage between. The
housekeeper had come out of her room, attracted by the violent
ringing of the bell. They had gone to the front of the house
together.

As they reached the bottom of the stair he had seen Mrs.
Douglas coming down it. No, she was not hurrying; it did not
seem to him that she was particularly agitated. Just as she
reached the bottom of the stair Mr. Barker had rushed out of the
study. He had stopped Mrs. Douglas and begged her to go back.

"For God's sake, go back to your room!" he cried. "Poor
Jack is dead! You can do nothing. For God's sake, go back!"

After some persuasion upon the stairs Mrs. Douglas had gone
back. She did not scream. She made no outcry whatever. Mrs.
Allen, the housekeeper, had taken her upstairs and stayed with
her in the bedroom. Ames and Mr. Barker had then returned to
the study, where they had found everything exactly as the police
had seen it. The candle was not lit at that time; but the lamp was
burning. They had looked out of the window; but the night was
very dark and nothing could be seen or heard. They had then
rushed out into the hall, where Ames had turned the windlass
which lowered the drawbridge. Mr. Barker had then hurried off
to get the police.

Such, in its essentials, was the evidence of the butler.

The account of Mrs. Allen, the housekeeper, was, so far as it
went, a corroboration of that of her fellow servant. The
housekeeper's room was rather nearer to the front of the house
than the pantry in which Ames had been working. She was preparing
to go to bed when the loud ringing of the bell had attracted her
attention. She was a little hard of hearing. Perhaps that was why
she had not heard the shot; but in any case the study was a long
way off. She remembered hearing some sound which she imagined to
be the slamming of a door. That was a good deal earlier -- half
an hour at least before the ringing of the bell. When Mr. Ames
ran to the front she went with him. She saw Mr. Barker, very
pale and excited, come out of the study. He intercepted Mrs.
Douglas, who was coming down the stairs. He entreated her to go
back, and she answered him, but what she said could not be heard.

"Take her up! Stay with her!" he had said to Mrs. Allen.

She had therefore taken her to the bedroom, and endeavoured
to soothe her. She was greatly excited, trembling all over, but
made no other attempt to go downstairs. She just sat in her
dressing gown by her bedroom fire, with her head sunk in her
hands. Mrs. Allen stayed with her most of the night. As to the
other servants, they had all gone to bed, and the alarm did not
reach them until just before the police arrived. They slept at the
extreme back of the house, and could not possibly have heard
anything.

So far the housekeeper could add nothing on cross-examination
save lamentations and expressions of amazement.

Cecil Barker succeeded Mrs. Allen as a witness. As to the
occurrences of the night before, he had very little to add to what
he had already told the police. Personally, he was convinced that
the murderer had escaped by the window. The bloodstain was
conclusive, in his opinion, on that point. Besides, as the bridge
was up, there was no other possible way of escaping. He could
not explain what had become of the assassin or why he had not
taken his bicycle, if it were indeed his. He could not possibly
have been drowned in the moat, which was at no place more
than three feet deep.

In his own mind he had a very definite theory about the
murder. Douglas was a reticent man, and there were some
chapters in his life of which he never spoke. He had emigrated to
America when he was a very young man. He had prospered
well, and Barker had first met him in California, where they had
become partners in a successful mining claim at a place called
Benito Canyon. They had done very well; but Douglas had
suddenly sold out and started for England. He was a widower at
that time. Barker had afterwards realized his money and come to
live in London. Thus they had renewed their friendship.

Douglas had given him the impression that some danger was
hanging over his head, and he had always looked upon his
sudden departure from California, and also his renting a house in
so quiet a place in England, as being connected with this peril.
He imagined that some secret society, some implacable organization,
was on Douglas's track, which would never rest until it killed him.
Some remarks of his had given him this idea; though he had never
told him what the society was, nor how he had come to offend it.
He could only suppose that the legend upon the placard had some
reference to this secret society.

"How long were you with Douglas in California?" asked
Inspector MacDonald.

"Five years altogether."

"He was a bachelor, you say?"

"A widower."

"Have you ever heard where his first wife came from?"

"No, I remember his saying that she was of German extraction,
and I have seen her portrait. She was a very beautiful woman.
She died of typhoid the year before I met him."

"You don't associate his past with any particular part of
America?"

"I have heard him talk of Chicago. He knew that city well and
had worked there. I have heard him talk of the coal and iron
districts. He had travelled a good deal in his time."

"Was he a politician? Had this secret society to do with
politics?"

"No, he cared nothing about politics."

"You have no reason to think it was criminal?"

"On the contrary, I never met a straighter man in my life."

"Was there anything curious about his life in California?"

"He liked best to stay and to work at our claim in the
mountains. He would never go where other men were if he could
help it. That's why I first thought that someone was after him.
Then when he left so suddenly for Europe I made sure that it was
so. I believe that he had a warning of some sort. Within a week
of his leaving half a dozen men were inquiring for him."

"What sort of men?"

"Well, they were a mighty hard-looking crowd. They came
up to the claim and wanted to know where he was. I told them
that he was gone to Europe and that I did not know where to find
him. They meant him no good -- it was easy to see that."

"Were these men Americans -- Californians?"

"Well, I don't know about Californians. They were Americans,
all right. But they were not miners. I don't know what they
were, and was very glad to see their backs."

"That was six years ago?"

"Nearer seven."

"And then you were together five years in California, so that
this business dates back not less than eleven years at the least?"

"That is so."

"It must be a very serious feud that would be kept up with
such earnestness for as long as that. It would be no light thing
that would give rise to it."

"I think it shadowed his whole life. It was never quite out of
his mind."

"But if a man had a danger hanging over him, and knew what
it was, don't you think he would turn to the police for protection?"

"Maybe it was some danger that he could not be protected
against. There's one thing you should know. He always went
about armed. His revolver was never out of his pocket. But, by
bad luck, he was in his dressing gown and had left it in the
bedroom last night. Once the bridge was up, I guess he thought
he was safe."

"I should like these dates a little clearer," said MacDonald.
"It is quite six years since Douglas left California. You followed
him next year, did you not?"

"That is so."

"And he had been married five years. You must have returned
about the time of his marriage."

"About a month before. I was his best man."

"Did you know Mrs. Douglas before her marriage?"

"No, I did not. I had been away from England for ten years."

"But you have seen a good deal of her since."

Barker looked sternly at the detective. "I have seen a good
deal of him since," he answered. "If I have seen her, it is
because you cannot visit a man without knowing his wife. If you
imagine there is any connection --"

"I imagine nothing, Mr. Barker. I am bound to make every
inquiry which can bear upon the case. But I mean no offense."

"Some inquiries are offensive," Barker answered angrily.

"It's only the facts that we want. It is in your interest and
everyone's interest that they should be cleared up. Did Mr.
Douglas entirely approve your friendship with his wife?"

Barker grew paler, and his great, strong hands were clasped
convulsively together. "You have no right to ask such
questions!" he cried. "What has this to do with the matter you
are investigating?"

"I must repeat the question."

"Well, I refuse to answer."

"You can refuse to answer; but you must be aware that your
refusal is in itself an answer, for you would not refuse if you had
not something to conceal."

Barker stood for a moment with his face set grimly and his
strong black eyebrows drawn low in intense thought. Then he
looked up with a smile. "Well, I guess you gentlemen are only
doing your clear duty after all, and I have no right to stand in the
way of it. I'd only ask you not to worry Mrs. Douglas over this
matter; for she has enough upon her just now. I may tell you that
poor Douglas had just one fault in the world, and that was his
jealousy. He was fond of me -- no man could be fonder of a
friend. And he was devoted to his wife. He loved me to come
here, and was forever sending for me. And yet if his wife and I
talked together or there seemed any sympathy between us, a kind
of wave of jealousy would pass over him, and he would be off
the handle and saying the wildest things in a moment. More than
once I've sworn off coming for that reason, and then he would
write me such penitent, imploring letters that I just had to. But
you can take it from me, gentlemen, if it was my last word, that
no man ever had a more loving, faithful wife -- and I can say also
no friend could be more loyal than I!"

It was spoken with fervour and feeling, and yet Inspector
MacDonald could not dismiss the subject.

"You are aware," said he, "that the dead man's wedding ring
has been taken from his finger?"

"So it appears," said Barker.

"What do you mean by 'appears'? You know it as a fact."

The man seemed confused and undecided. "When I said
'appears' I meant that it was conceivable that he had himself
taken off the ring."

"The mere fact that the ring should be absent, whoever may
have removed it, would suggest to anyone's mind, would it not,
that the marriage and the tragedy were connected?"

Barker shrugged his broad shoulders. "I can't profess to say
what it means." he answered. "But if you mean to hint that it
could reflect in any way upon this lady's honour" -- his eyes
blazed for an instant, and then with an evident effort he got a
grip upon his own emotions -- "well, you are on the wrong track,
that's all."

"I don't know that I've anything else to ask you at present,"
said MacDonald, coldly.

"There was one small point," remarked Sherlock Holmes.
"When you entered the room there was only a candle lighted on
the table, was there not?"

"Yes, that was so."

"By its light you saw that some terrible incident had occurred?"

"Exactly."

"You at once rang for help?"

"Yes."

"And it arrived very speedily?"

"Within a minute or so."

"And yet when they arrived they found that the candle was
out and that the lamp had been lighted. That seems very
remarkable."

Again Barker showed some signs of indecision. "I don't see
that it was remarkable, Mr. Holmes," he answered after a pause.
"The candle threw a very bad light. My first thought was to get
a better one. The lamp was on the table; so I lit it."

"And blew out the candle?"

"Exactly."

Holmes asked no further question, and Barker, with a deliberate
look from one to the other of us, which had, as it seemed to me,
something of defiance in it, turned and left the room.

Inspector MacDonald had sent up a note to the effect that he
would wait upon Mrs. Douglas in her room; but she had replied
that she would meet us in the dining room. She entered now, a
tall and beautiful woman of thirty, reserved and self-possessed to
a remarkable degree, very different from the tragic and distracted
figure I had pictured. It is true that her face was pale and drawn,
like that of one who has endured a great shock; but her manner
was composed, and the finely moulded hand which she rested
upon the edge of the table was as steady as my own. Her sad,
appealing eyes travelled from one to the other of us with a
curiously inquisitive expression. That questioning gaze
transformed itself suddenly into abrupt speech.

"Have you found anything out yet?" she asked.

Was it my imagination that there was an undertone of fear
rather than of hope in the question?

"We have taken every possible step, Mrs. Douglas," said the
inspector. "You may rest assured that nothing will be neglected."

"Spare no money," she said in a dead, even tone. "It is my
desire that every possible effort should be made."

"Perhaps you can tell us something which may throw some
light upon the matter."

"I fear not; but all I know is at your service."

"We have heard from Mr. Cecil Barker that you did not
actually see -- that you were never in the room where the tragedy
occurred?"

"No, he turned me back upon the stairs. He begged me to
return to my room."

"Quite so. You had heard the shot, and you had at once come
down."

"I put on my dressing gown and then came down."

"How long was it after hearing the shot that you were stopped
on the stair by Mr. Barker?"

"It may have been a couple of minutes. It is so hard to reckon
time at such a moment. He implored me not to go on. He
assured me that I could do nothing. Then Mrs. Allen, the
housekeeper, led me upstairs again. It was all like some dreadful
dream."

"Can you give us any idea how long your husband had been
downstairs before you heard the shot?"

"No, I cannot say. He went from his dressing room, and I did
not hear him go. He did the round of the house every night, for
he was nervous of fire. It is the only thing that I have ever
known him nervous of."

"That is just the point which I want to come to, Mrs. Douglas.
You have known your husband only in England, have you not?"

"Yes, we have been married five years."

"Have you heard him speak of anything which occurred in
America and might bring some danger upon him?"

Mrs. Douglas thought earnestly before she answered. "Yes."
she said at last, "I have always felt that there was a danger
hanging over him. He refused to discuss it with me. It was not
from want of confidence in me -- there was the most complete
love and confidence between us -- but it was out of his desire to
keep all alarm away from me. He thought I should brood over it
if I knew all, and so he was silent."

"How did you know it, then?"

Mrs. Douglas's face lit with a quick smile. "Can a husband
ever carry about a secret all his life and a woman who loves him
have no suspicion of it? I knew it by his refusal to talk about
some episodes in his American life. I knew it by certain precautions
he took. I knew it by certain words he let fall. I knew it by the
way he looked at unexpected strangers. I was perfectly certain that
he had some powerful enemies, that he believed they were on his
track, and that he was always on his guard against them. I was so
sure of it that for years I have been terrified if ever he came
home later than was expected."

"Might I ask," asked Holmes, "what the words were which
attracted your attention?"

"The Valley of Fear," the lady answered. "That was an
expression he has used when I questioned him. 'I have been in
the Valley of Fear. I am not out of it yet.' -- 'Are we never to get
out of the Valley of Fear?' I have asked him when I have seen
him more serious than usual. 'Sometimes I think that we never
shall,' he has answered."

"Surely you asked him what he meant by the Valley of
Fear?"

"I did; but his face would become very grave and he would
shake his head. 'It is bad enough that one of us should have been
in its shadow,' he said. 'Please God it shall never fall upon you!'
It was some real valley in which he had lived and in which
something terrible had occurred to him, of that I am certain; but I
can tell you no more."

"And he never mentioned any names?"

"Yes, he was delirious with fever once when he had his
hunting accident three years ago. Then I remember that there
was a name that came continually to his lips. He spoke it with
anger and a sort of horror. McGinty was the name -- Bodymaster
McGinty. I asked him when he recovered who Bodymaster
McGinty was, and whose body he was master of. 'Never of
mine, thank God!' he answered with a laugh, and that was all I
could get from him. But there is a connection between Bodymaster
McGinty and the Valley of Fear."

"There is one other point," said Inspector MacDonald. "You
met Mr. Douglas in a boarding house in London, did you not,
and became engaged to him there? Was there any romance,
anything secret or mysterious, about the wedding?"

"There was romance. There is always romance. There was
nothing mysterious."

"He had no rival?"

"No, I was quite free."

"You have heard, no doubt, that his wedding ring has been
taken. Does that suggest anything to you? Suppose that some
enemy of his old life had tracked him down and committed this
crime, what possible reason could he have for taking his
wedding ring?"

For an instant I could have sworn that the faintest shadow of a
smile flickered over the woman's lips.

"I really cannot tell," she answered. "It is certainly a most
extraordinary thing."

"Well, we will not detain you any longer, and we are sorry to
have put you to this trouble at such a time," said the inspector.
"There are some other points, no doubt; but we can refer to you
as they arise."

She rose, and I was again conscious of that quick, questioning
glance with which she had just surveyed us. "What impression
has my evidence made upon you?" The question might as well
have been spoken. Then, with a bow, she swept from the room.

"She's a beautiful woman -- a very beautiful woman," said
MacDonald thoughtfully, after the door had closed behind her.
"This man Barker has certainly been down here a good deal. He
is a man who might be attractive to a woman. He admits that the
dead man was jealous, and maybe he knew best himself what
cause he had for jealousy. Then there's that wedding ring. You
can't get past that. The man who tears a wedding ring off a dead
man's -- What do you say to it, Mr. Holmes?"

My friend had sat with his head upon his hands, sunk in the
deepest thought. Now he rose and rang the bell. "Ames," he
said, when the butler entered, "where is Mr. Cecil Barker
now?"

"I'll see, sir."

He came back in a moment to say that Barker was in the
garden.

"Can you remember, Ames, what Mr. Barker had on his feet
last night when you joined him in the study?"

"Yes, Mr. Holmes. He had a pair of bedroom slippers. I
brought him his boots when he went for the police."

"Where are the slippers now?"

"They are still under the chair in the hall."

"Very good, Ames. It is, of course, important for us to know
which tracks may be Mr. Barker's and which from outside."

"Yes, sir. I may say that I noticed that the slippers were
stained with blood -- so indeed were my own."

"That is natural enough, considering the condition of the
room. Very good, Ames. We will ring if we want you."

A few minutes later we were in the study. Holmes had brought
with him the carpet slippers from the hall. As Ames had observed,
the soles of both were dark with blood.

"Strange!" murmured Holmes, as he stood in the light of the
window and examined them minutely. "Very strange indeed!"

Stooping with one of his quick feline pounces, he placed the
slipper upon the blood mark on the sill. It exactly corresponded.
He smiled in silence at his colleagues.

The inspector was transfigured with excitement. His native
accent rattled like a stick upon railings.

"Man," he cried, "there's not a doubt of it! Barker has just
marked the window himself. It's a good deal broader than any
bootmark. I mind that you said it was a splay-foot, and here's
the explanation. But what's the game, Mr. Holmes -- what's the
game?"

"Ay, what's the game?" my friend repeated thoughtfully.

White Mason chuckled and rubbed his fat hands together in
his professional satisfaction. "I said it was a snorter!" he cried.
"And a real snorter it is!"



Chapter 6
A Dawning Light

The three detectives had many matters of detail into which to
inquire; so I returned alone to our modest quarters at the village
inn. But before doing so I took a stroll in the curious old-world
garden which flanked the house. Rows of very ancient yew trees
cut into strange designs girded it round. Inside was a beautiful
stretch of lawn with an old sundial in the middle, the whole
effect so soothing and restful that it was welcome to my somewhat
jangled nerves.

In that deeply peaceful atmosphere one could forget, or remember
only as some fantastic nightmare, that darkened study with the
sprawling, bloodstained figure on the floor. And yet, as I strolled
round it and tried to steep my soul in its gentle balm, a strange
incident occurred, which brought me back to the tragedy and left a
sinister impression in my mind.

I have said that a decoration of yew trees circled the garden.
At the end farthest from the house they thickened into a continuous
hedge. On the other side of this hedge, concealed from the eyes of
anyone approaching from the direction of the house, there was a
stone seat. As I approached the spot I was aware of voices, some
remark in the deep tones of a man, answered by a little ripple of
feminine laughter.

An instant later I had come round the end of the hedge and my
eyes lit upon Mrs. Douglas and the man Barker before they were
aware of my presence. Her appearance gave me a shock. In the
dining-room she had been demure and discreet. Now all pretense
of grief had passed away from her. Her eyes shone with the joy
of living, and her face still quivered with amusement at some
remark of her companion. He sat forward, his hands clasped and
his forearms on his knees, with an answering smile upon his
bold, handsome face. In an instant -- but it was just one instant
too late -- they resumed their solemn masks as my figure came
into view. A hurried word or two passed between them, and then
Barker rose and came towards me.

"Excuse me, sir," said he, "but am I addressing Dr. Watson?"

I bowed with a coldness which showed, I dare say, very
plainly the impression which had been produced upon my mind.

"We thought that it was probably you, as your friendship with
Mr. Sherlock Holmes is so well known. Would you mind coming over
and speaking to Mrs. Douglas for one instant?"

I followed him with a dour face. Very clearly I could see in
my mind's eye that shattered figure on the floor. Here within a
few hours of the tragedy were his wife and his nearest friend
laughing together behind a bush in the garden which had been his.
I greeted the lady with reserve. I had grieved with her grief in
the dining-room. Now I met her appealing gaze with an unresponsive
eye.

"I fear that you think me callous and hard-hearted." said she.

I shrugged my shoulders. "It is no business of mine," said I.

"Perhaps some day you will do me justice. If you only
realized --"

"There is no need why Dr. Watson should realize," said
Barker quickly. "As he has himself said, it is no possible
business of his."

"Exactly," said I, "and so I will beg leave to resume my
walk."

"One moment, Dr. Watson," cried the woman in a pleading
voice. "There is one question which you can answer with more
authority than anyone else in the world, and it may make a very
great difference to me. You know Mr. Holmes and his relations
with the police better than anyone else can. Supposing that a
matter were brought confidentially to his knowledge, is it
absolutely necessary that he should pass it on to the detectives?"

"Yes, that's it," said Barker eagerly. "Is he on his own or is
he entirely in with them?"

"I really don't know that I should be justified in discussing
such a point."

"I beg -- I implore that you will, Dr. Watson! I assure you that
you will be helping us -- helping me greatly if you will guide us
on that point."

There was such a ring of sincerity in the woman's voice that
for the instant I forgot all about her levity and was moved only to
do her will.

"Mr. Holmes is an independent investigator," I said. "He is
his own master, and would act as his own judgment directed. At
the same time, he would naturally feel loyalty towards the
officials who were working on the same case, and he would not
conceal from them anything which would help them in bringing
a criminal to justice. Beyond this I can say nothing, and I would
refer you to Mr. Holmes himself if you wanted fuller information."

So saying I raised my hat and went upon my way, leaving
them still seated behind that concealing hedge. I looked back as I
rounded the far end of it, and saw that they were still talking
very earnestly together, and, as they were gazing after me, it was
clear that it was our interview that was the subject of their
debate.

"I wish none of their confidences," said Holmes, when I
reported to him what had occurred. He had spent the whole
afternoon at the Manor House in consultation with his two
colleagues, and returned about five with a ravenous appetite for a
high tea which I had ordered for him. "No confidences, Watson;
for they are mighty awkward if it comes to an arrest for
conspiracy and murder."

"You think it will come to that?"

He was in his most cheerful and debonair humour. "My dear
Watson, when I have exterminated that fourth egg I shall be
ready to put you in touch with the whole situation. I don't say
that we have fathomed it -- far from it -- but when we have traced
the missing dumb-bell --"

"The dumb-bell!"

"Dear me, Watson, is it possible that you have not penetrated
the fact that the case hangs upon the missing dumb-bell? Well,
well, you need not be downcast; for between ourselves I don't
think that either Inspector Mac or the excellent local practitioner
has grasped the overwhelming importance of this incident. One
dumb-bell, Watson! Consider an athlete with one dumb-bell!
Picture to yourself the unilateral development, the imminent
danger of a spinal curvature. Shocking, Watson, shocking!"

He sat with his mouth full of toast and his eyes sparkling with
mischief, watching my intellectual entanglement. The mere sight
of his excellent appetite was an assurance of success, for I had
very clear recollections of days and nights without a thought of
food, when his baffled mind had chafed before some problem
while his thin, eager features became more attenuated with the
asceticism of complete mental concentration. Finally he lit his
pipe, and sitting in the inglenook of the old village inn he talked
slowly and at random about his case, rather as one who thinks
aloud than as one who makes a considered statement.

"A lie, Watson -- a great, big, thumping, obtrusive,
uncompromising lie -- that's what meets us on the threshold! There
is our starting point. The whole story told by Barker is a lie.
But Barker's story is corroborated by Mrs. Douglas. Therefore she
is lying also. They are both lying, and in a conspiracy. So now we
have the clear problem. Why are they lying, and what is the truth
which they are trying so hard to conceal? Let us try, Watson,
you and I, if we can get behind the lie and reconstruct the truth.

"How do I know that they are lying? Because it is a clumsy
fabrication which simply could not be true. Consider! According
to the story given to us, the assassin had less than a minute after
the murder had been committed to take that ring, which was under
another ring, from the dead man's finger, to replace the other
ring -- a thing which he would surely never have done -- and to
put that singular card beside his victim. I say that this was
obviously impossible.

"You may argue -- but I have too much respect for your
judgment, Watson, to think that you will do so -- that the ring
may have been taken before the man was killed. The fact that the
candle had been lit only a short time shows that there had been
no lengthy interview. Was Douglas, from what we hear of his
fearless character, a man who would be likely to give up his
wedding ring at such short notice, or could we conceive of his
giving it up at all? No, no, Watson, the assassin was alone with
the dead man for some time with the lamp lit. Of that I have no
doubt at all.

"But the gunshot was apparently the cause of death. Therefore
the shot must have been fired some time earlier than we are told.
But there could be no mistake about such a matter as that. We
are in the presence, therefore, of a deliberate conspiracy upon
the part of the two people who heard the gunshot -- of the man
Barker and of the woman Douglas. When on the top of this I am
able to show that the blood mark on the windowsill was deliberately
placed there by Barker, in order to give a false clue to the police,
you will admit that the case grows dark against him.

"Now we have to ask ourselves at what hour the murder
actually did occur. Up to half-past ten the servants were moving
about the house; so it was certainly not before that time. At a
quarter to eleven they had all gone to their rooms with the
exception of Ames, who was in the pantry. I have been trying
some experiments after you left us this afternoon, and I find that
no noise which MacDonald can make in the study can penetrate
to me in the pantry when the doors are all shut.

"It is otherwise, however, from the housekeeper's room. It is
not so far down the corridor, and from it I could vaguely hear a
voice when it was very loudly raised. The sound from a shotgun
is to some extent muffled when the discharge is at very close
range, as it undoubtedly was in this instance. It would not be
very loud, and yet in the silence of the night it should have easily
penetrated to Mrs. Allen's room. She is, as she has told us,
somewhat deaf; but none the less she mentioned in her evidence
that she did hear something like a door slamming half an hour
before the alarm was given. Half an hour before the alarm was
given would be a quarter to eleven. I have no doubt that what
she heard was the report of the gun, and that this was the real
instant of the murder.

"If this is so, we have now to determine what Barker and
Mrs. Douglas, presuming that they are not the actual murderers,
could have been doing from quarter to eleven, when the sound of
the shot brought them down, until quarter past eleven, when they
rang the bell and summoned the servants. What were they doing,
and why did they not instantly give the alarm? That is the
question which faces us, and when it has been answered we shall
surely have gone some way to solve our problem."

"I am convinced myself," said I, "that there is an understanding
between those two people. She must be a heartless creature to sit
laughing at some jest within a few hours of her husband's murder."

"Exactly. She does not shine as a wife even in her own
account of what occurred. I am not a whole-souled admirer of
womankind, as you are aware, Watson, but my experience of
life has taught me that there are few wives, having any regard for
their husbands, who would let any man's spoken word stand
between them and that husband's dead body. Should I ever
marry, Watson, I should hope to inspire my wife with some
feeling which would prevent her from being walked off by a
housekeeper when my corpse was lying within a few yards of
her. It was badly stage-managed; for even the rawest investigators
must be struck by the absence of the usual feminine ululation.
If there had been nothing else, this incident alone would have
suggested a prearranged conspiracy to my mind."

"You think then, definitely, that Barker and Mrs. Douglas are
guilty of the murder?"

"There is an appalling directness about your questions, Watson,"
said Holmes, shaking his pipe at me. "They come at me like bullets.
If you put it that Mrs. Douglas and Barker know the truth about
the murder, and are conspiring to conceal it, then I can give you
a whole-souled answer. I am sure they do. But your more deadly
proposition is not so clear. Let us for a moment consider the
difficulties which stand in the way.

"We will suppose that this couple are united by the bonds of a
guilty love, and that they have determined to get rid of the man
who stands between them. It is a large supposition; for discreet
inquiry among servants and others has failed to corroborate it in
any way. On the contrary, there is a good deal of evidence that
the Douglases were very attached to each other."

"That, I am sure, cannot he true." said I, thinking of the
beautiful smiling face in the garden.

"Well at least they gave that impression. However, we will
suppose that they are an extraordinarily astute couple, who
deceive everyone upon this point, and conspire to murder the
husband. He happens to be a man over whose head some danger
hangs --"

"We have only their word for that."

Holmes looked thoughtful. "I see, Watson. You are sketching
out a theory by which everything they say from the beginning is
false. According to your idea, there was never any hidden menace,
or secret society, or Valley of Fear, or Boss MacSomebody, or
anything else. Well, that is a good sweeping generalization.
Let us see what that brings us to. They invent this theory to
account for the crime. They then play up to the idea by leaving
this bicycle in the park as proof of the existence of some
outsider. The stain on the windowsill conveys the same idea. So
does the card on the body, which might have been prepared in
the house. That all fits into your hypothesis, Watson. But now
we come on the nasty, angular, uncompromising bits which
won't slip into their places. Why a cut-off shotgun of all weapons
-- and an American one at that? How could they be so sure that the
sound of it would not bring someone on to them? It's a mere chance
as it is that Mrs. Allen did not start out to inquire for the
slamming door. Why did your guilty couple do all this, Watson?"

"I confess that I can't explain it."

"Then again, if a woman and her lover conspire to murder a
husband, are they going to advertise their guilt by ostentatiously
removing his wedding ring after his death? Does that strike you
as very probable, Watson?"

"No, it does not."

"And once again, if the thought of leaving a bicycle concealed
outside had occurred to you, would it really have seemed worth
doing when the dullest detective would naturally say this is an
obvious blind, as the bicycle is the first thing which the fugitive
needed in order to make his escape."

"I can conceive of no explanation."

"And yet there should be no combination of events for which
the wit of man cannot conceive an explanation. Simply as a
mental exercise, without any assertion that it is true, let me
indicate a possible line of thought. It is, I admit, mere
imagination; but how often is imagination the mother of truth?

"We will suppose that there was a guilty secret, a really
shameful secret in the life of this man Douglas. This leads to his
murder by someone who is, we will suppose, an avenger, someone from
outside. This avenger, for some reason which I confess I am still
at a loss to explain, took the dead man's wedding ring. The vendetta
might conceivably date back to the man's first marriage, and the
ring be taken for some such reason.

"Before this avenger got away, Barker and the wife had
reached the room. The assassin convinced them that any attempt
to arrest him would lead to the publication of some hideous
scandal. They were converted to this idea, and preferred to let
him go. For this purpose they probably lowered the bridge,
which can be done quite noiselessly, and then raised it again. He
made his escape, and for some reason thought that he could do
so more safely on foot than on the bicycle. He therefore left his
machine where it would not be discovered until he had got safely
away. So far we are within the bounds of possibility, are we
not?"

"Well, it is possible, no doubt," said I, with some reserve.

"We have to remember, Watson, that whatever occurred is
certainly something very extraordinary. Well, now, to continue
our supposititious case, the couple -- not necessarily a guilty
couple -- realize after the murderer is gone that they have placed
themselves in a position in which it may be difficult for them to
prove that they did not themselves either do the deed or connive
at it. They rapidly and rather clumsily met the situation. The
mark was put by Barker's bloodstained slipper upon the window-
sill to suggest how the fugitive got away. They obviously were
the two who must have heard the sound of the gun; so they gave
the alarm exactly as they would have done, but a good half hour
after the event."

"And how do you propose to prove all this?"

"Well, if there were an outsider, he may be traced and taken.
That would be the most effective of all proofs. But if not -- well,
the resources of science are far from being exhausted. I think
that an evening alone in that study would help me much."

"An evening alone!"

"I propose to go up there presently. I have arranged it with
the estimable Ames, who is by no means whole-hearted about
Barker. I shall sit in that room and see if its atmosphere brings
me inspiration. I'm a believer in the genius loci. You smile,
Friend Watson. Well, we shall see. By the way, you have that
big umbrella of yours, have you not?"

"It is here."

"Well, I'll borrow that if I may."

"Certainly -- but what a wretched weapon! If there is
danger --"

"Nothing serious, my dear Watson, or I should certainly ask
for your assistance. But I'll take the umbrella. At present I am
only awaiting the return of our colleagues from Tunbridge Wells,
where they are at present engaged in trying for a likely owner to
the bicycle."

It was nightfall before Inspector MacDonald and White Mason
came back from their expedition, and they arrived exultant,
reporting a great advance in our investigation.

"Man, I'll admeet that I had my doubts if there was ever an
outsider," said MacDonald, "but that's all past now. We've had
the bicycle identified, and we have a description of our man; so
that's a long step on our journey."

"It sounds to me like the beginning of the end," said Holmes.
"I'm sure I congratulate you both with all my heart."

"Well, I started from the fact that Mr. Douglas had seemed
disturbed since the day before, when he had been at Tunbridge
Wells. It was at Tunbridge Wells then that he had become
conscious of some danger. It was clear, therefore, that if a man
had come over with a bicycle it was from Tunbridge Wells that
he might be expected to have come. We took the bicycle over
with us and showed it at the hotels. It was identified at once by
the manager of the Eagle Commercial as belonging to a man
named Hargrave, who had taken a room there two days before.
This bicycle and a small valise were his whole belongings. He
had registered his name as coming from London, but had given
no address. The valise was London made, and the contents were
British; but the man himself was undoubtedly an American."

"Well, well," said Holmes gleefully, "you have indeed done
some solid work while I have been sitting spinning theories with
my friend! It's a lesson in being practical, Mr. Mac."

"Ay, it's just that, Mr. Holmes," said the inspector with
satisfaction.

"But this may all fit in with your theories," I remarked.

"That may or may not be. But let us hear the end, Mr. Mac.
Was there nothing to identify this man?"

"So little that it was evident that he had carefully guarded
himself against identification. There were no papers or letters,
and no marking upon the clothes. A cycle map of the county lay
on his bedroom table. He had left the hotel after breakfast
yesterday morning on his bicycle, and no more was heard of him
until our inquiries."

"That's what puzzles me, Mr. Holmes," said White Mason.
"If the fellow did not want the hue and cry raised over him, one
would imagine that he would have returned and remained at the
hotel as an inoffensive tourist. As it is, he must know that he
will be reported to the police by the hotel manager and that his
disappearance will be connected with the murder."

"So one would imagine. Still, he has been justified of his
wisdom up to date, at any rate, since he has not been taken. But
his description -- what of that?"

MacDonald referred to his notebook. "Here we have it so far
as they could give it. They don't seem to have taken any very
particular stock of him; but still the porter, the clerk, and the
chambermaid are all agreed that this about covers the points. He
was a man about five foot nine in height, fifty or so years of age,
his hair slightly grizzled, a grayish moustache, a curved nose,
and a face which all of them described as fierce and forbidding."

"Well, bar the expression, that might almost be a description
of Douglas himself," said Holmes. "He is just over fifty, with
grizzled hair and moustache, and about the same height. Did you
get anything else?"

"He was dressed in a heavy gray suit with a reefer jacket, and
he wore a short yellow overcoat and a soft cap."

"What about the shotgun?"

"It is less than two feet long. It could very well have fitted
into his valise. He could have carried it inside his overcoat
without difficulty."

"And how do you consider that all this bears upon the general
case?"

"Well, Mr. Holmes," said MacDonald, "when we have got
our man -- and you may be sure that I had his description on the
wires within five minutes of hearing it -- we shall be better able
to judge. But, even as it stands, we have surely gone a long way.
We know that an American calling himself Hargrave came to
Tunbridge Wells two days ago with bicycle and valise. In the
latter was a sawed-off shotgun; so he came with the deliberate
purpose of crime. Yesterday morning he set off for this place on
his bicycle, with his gun concealed in his overcoat. No one saw
him arrive, so far as we can learn; but he need not pass through
the village to reach the park gates, and there are many cyclists
upon the road. Presumably he at once concealed his cycle among
the laurels where it was found, and possibly lurked there himself,
with his eye on the house, waiting for Mr. Douglas to come out.
The shotgun is a strange weapon to use inside a house; but he had
intended to use it outside, and there it has very obvious advantages,
as it would be impossible to miss with it, and the sound of shots
is so common in an English sporting neighbourhood that no particular
notice would be taken."

"That is all very clear," said Holmes.

"Well, Mr. Douglas did not appear. What was he to do next?
He left his bicycle and approached the house in the twilight. He
found the bridge down and no one about. He took his chance,
intending, no doubt, to make some excuse if he met anyone. He
met no one. He slipped into the first room that he saw, and
concealed himself behind the curtain. Thence he could see the
drawbridge go up, and he knew that his only escape was through
the moat. He waited until quarter-past eleven, when Mr. Douglas
upon his usual nightly round came into the room. He shot him
and escaped, as arranged. He was aware that the bicycle would
be described by the hotel people and be a clue against him; so he
left it there and made his way by some other means to London or
to some safe hiding place which he had already arranged. How is
that, Mr. Holmes?"

"Well, Mr. Mac, it is very good and very clear so far as it
goes. That is your end of the story. My end is that the crime was
committed half an hour earlier than reported; that Mrs. Douglas
and Barker are both in a conspiracy to conceal something; that
they aided the murderer's escape -- or at least that they reached
the room before he escaped -- and that they fabricated evidence
of his escape through the window, whereas in all probability they
had themselves let him go by lowering the bridge. That's my
reading of the first half."

The two detectives shook their heads.

"Well, Mr. Holmes, if this is true, we only tumble out of one
mystery into another," said the London inspector.

"And in some ways a worse one," added White Mason. "The
lady has never been in America in all her life. What possible
connection could she have with an American assassin which
would cause her to shelter him?"

"I freely admit the difficulties," said Holmes. "I propose to
make a little investigation of my own to-night, and it is just
possible that it may contribute something to the common cause."

"Can we help you, Mr. Holmes?"

"No, no! Darkness and Dr. Watson's umbrella -- my wants are
simple. And Ames, the faithful Ames, no doubt he will stretch a
point for me. All my lines of thought lead me back invariably
to the one basic question -- why should an athletic man develop
his frame upon so unnatural an instrument as a single dumb-bell?"

It was late that night when Holmes returned from his solitary
excursion. We slept in a double-bedded room, which was the
best that the little country inn could do for us. I was already
asleep when I was partly awakened by his entrance.

"Well, Holmes," I murmured, "have you found anything
out?"

He stood beside me in silence, his candle in his hand. Then
the tall, lean figure inclined towards me. "I say, Watson," he
whispered, "would you be afraid to sleep in the same room with
a lunatic, a man with softening of the brain, an idiot whose mind
has lost its grip?"

"Not in the least," I answered in astonishment.

"Ah, that's lucky," he said, and not another word would he
utter that night.



Chapter 7
The Solution

Next morning, after breakfast, we found Inspector MacDonald
and White Mason seated in close consultation in the small parlour
of the local police sergeant. On the table in front of them
were piled a number of letters and telegrams, which they were
carefully sorting and docketing. Three had been placed on one
side.

"Still on the track of the elusive bicyclist?" Holmes asked
cheerfully. "What is the latest news of the ruffian?"

MacDonald pointed ruefully to his heap of correspondence.

"He is at present reported from Leicester, Nottingham,
Southampton, Derby, East Ham, Richmond, and fourteen other places.
In three of them -- East Ham, Leicester, and Liverpool -- there is
a clear case against him, and he has actually been arrested. The
country seems to be full of the fugitives with yellow coats."

"Dear me!" said Holmes sympathetically. "Now, Mr. Mac
and you, Mr. White Mason, I wish to give you a very earnest
piece of advice. When I went into this case with you I bargained,
as you will no doubt remember, that I should not present you
with half-proved theories, but that I should retain and work out
my own ideas until I had satisfied myself that they were correct.
For this reason I am not at the present moment telling you all
that is in my mind. On the other hand, I said that I would play
the game fairly by you, and I do not think it is a fair game to
allow you for one unnecessary moment to waste your energies
upon a profitless task. Therefore I am here to advise you this
morning, and my advice to you is summed up in three words --
abandon the case."

MacDonald and White Mason stared in amazement at their
celebrated colleague.

"You consider it hopeless!" cried the inspector.

"I consider your case to be hopeless. I do not consider that it
is hopeless to arrive at the truth."

"But this cyclist. He is not an invention. We have his description,
his valise, his bicycle. The fellow must be somewhere. Why should we
not get him?"

"Yes, yes, no doubt he is somewhere, and no doubt we shall
get him; but I would not have you waste your energies in East
Ham or Liverpool. I am sure that we can find some shorter cut to
a result."

"You are holding something back. It's hardly fair of you, Mr.
Holmes." The inspector was annoyed.

"You know my methods of work, Mr. Mac. But I will hold it
back for the shortest time possible. I only wish to verify my
details in one way, which can very readily be done, and then I
make my bow and return to London, leaving my results entirely
at your service. I owe you too much to act otherwise; for in all
my experience I cannot recall any more singular and interesting
study."

"This is clean beyond me, Mr. Holmes. We saw you when
we returned from Tunbridge Wells last night, and you were in
general agreement with our results. What has happened since
then to give you a completely new idea of the case?"

"Well, since you ask me, I spent, as I told you that I would,
some hours last night at the Manor House."

"Well, what happened?"

"Ah, I can only give you a very general answer to that for the
moment. By the way, I have been reading a short but clear and
interesting account of the old building, purchasable at the modest
sum of one penny from the local tobacconist."

Here Holmes drew a small tract, embellished with a rude
engraving of the ancient Manor House, from his waistcoat pocket.

"It immensely adds to the zest of an investigation, my dear
Mr. Mac, when one is in conscious sympathy with the historical
atmosphere of one's surroundings. Don't look so impatient; for I
assure you that even so bald an account as this raises some sort
of picture of the past in one's mind. Permit me to give you a
sample. 'Erected in the fifth year of the reign of James I, and
standing upon the site of a much older building, the Manor
House of Birlstone presents one of the finest surviving examples
of the moated Jacobean residence --' "

"You are making fools of us, Mr. Holmes!"

"Tut, tut, Mr. Mac! -- the first sign of temper I have detected
in you. Well, I won't read it verbatim, since you feel so strongly
upon the subject. But when I tell you that there is some account
of the taking of the place by a parliamentary colonel in 1644, of
the concealment of Charles for several days in the course of the
Civil War, and finally of a visit there by the second George, you
will admit that there are various associations of interest connected
with this ancient house."

"I don't doubt it, Mr. Holmes; but that is no business of
ours."

"Is it not? Is it not? Breadth of view, my dear Mr. Mac, is
one of the essentials of our profession. The interplay of ideas and
the oblique uses of knowledge are often of extraordinary interest.
You will excuse these remarks from one who, though a mere
connoisseur of crime, is still rather older and perhaps more
experienced than yourself."

"I'm the first to admit that," said the detective heartily. "You
get to your point, I admit; but you have such a deuced round-the-
corner way of doing it."

"Well, well, I'll drop past history and get down to present-
day facts. I called last night, as I have already said, at the
Manor House. I did not see either Barker or Mrs. Douglas. I saw
no necessity to disturb them; but I was pleased to hear that the
lady was not visibly pining and that she had partaken of an
excellent dinner. My visit was specially made to the good Mr.
Ames, with whom I exchanged some amiabilities, which culminated
in his allowing me, without reference to anyone else, to sit
alone for a time in the study."

"What! With that?" I ejaculated.

"No, no, everything is now in order. You gave permission for
that, Mr. Mac, as I am informed. The room was in its normal
state, and in it I passed an instructive quarter of an hour."

"What were you doing?"

"Well, not to make a mystery of so simple a matter, I was
looking for the missing dumb-bell. It has always bulked rather
large in my estimate of the case. I ended by finding it."

"Where?"

"Ah, there we come to the edge of the unexplored. Let me go
a little further, a very little further, and I will promise that you
shall share everything that I know."

"Well, we're bound to take you on your own terms," said the
inspector; "but when it comes to telling us to abandon the
case -- why in the name of goodness should we abandon the
case?"

"For the simple reason, my dear Mr. Mac, that you have not
got the first idea what it is that you are investigating."

"We are investigating the murder of Mr. John Douglas of
Birlstone Manor."

"Yes, yes, so you are. But don't trouble to trace the mysterious
gentleman upon the bicycle. I assure you that it won't help you."

"Then what do you suggest that we do?"

"I will tell you exactly what to do, if you will do it."

"Well, I'm bound to say I've always found you had reason
behind all your queer ways. I'll do what you advise."

"And you, Mr. White Mason?"

The country detective looked helplessly from one to the other.
Holmes and his methods were new to him. "Well, if it is good
enough for the inspector, it is good enough for me," he said at
last.

"Capital!" said Holmes. "Well, then, I should recommend a
nice, cheery country walk for both of you. They tell me that the
views from Birlstone Ridge over the Weald are very remarkable.
No doubt lunch could be got at some suitable hostelry; though
my ignorance of the country prevents me from recommending
one. In the evening, tired but happy --"

"Man, this is getting past a joke!" cried MacDonald, rising
angrily from his chair.

"Well, well, spend the day as you like," said Holmes, patting
him cheerfully upon the shoulder. "Do what you like and go
where you will, but meet me here before dusk without fail --
without fail, Mr. Mac."

"That sounds more like sanity."

"All of it was excellent advice; but I don't insist, so long as
you are here when I need you. But now, before we part, I want
you to write a note to Mr. Barker."

"Well?"

"I'll dictate it, if you like. Ready?

      "Dear Sir:

        "It has struck me that it is our duty to drain the moat, in

      the hope that we may find some --"

"It's impossible," said the inspector. "I've made inquiry."

"Tut, tut! My dear sir, please do what I ask you."

"Well, go on."

      "-- in the hope that we may find something which may bear

      upon our investigation. I have made arrangements, and the

      workmen will be at work early to-morrow morning diverting

      the stream --"

"Impossible!"

      "-- diverting the stream; so I thought it best to explain
matters beforehand.

"Now sign that, and send it by hand about four o'clock. At that
hour we shall meet again in this room. Until then we may each
do what we like; for I can assure you that this inquiry has come
to a definite pause."

Evening was drawing in when we reassembled. Holmes was
very serious in his manner, myself curious, and the detectives
obviously critical and annoyed.

"Well, gentlemen," said my friend gravely, "I am asking
you now to put everything to the test with me, and you will
judge for yourselves whether the observations I have made justify
the conclusions to which I have come. It is a chill evening,
and I do not know how long our expedition may last; so I beg
that you will wear your warmest coats. It is of the first
importance that we should be in our places before it grows dark;
so with your permission we shall get started at once."

We passed along the outer bounds of the Manor House park
until we came to a place where there was a gap in the rails which
fenced it. Through this we slipped, and then in the gathering
gloom we followed Holmes until we had reached a shrubbery
which lies nearly opposite to the main door and the drawbridge.
The latter had not been raised. Holmes crouched down behind
the screen of laurels, and we all three followed his example.

"Well, what are we to do now?" asked MacDonald with
some gruffness.

"Possess our souls in patience and make as little noise as
possible," Holmes answered.

"What are we here for at all? I really think that you might
treat us with more frankness."

Holmes laughed. "Watson insists that I am the dramatist in
real life," said he. "Some touch of the artist wells up within me,
and calls insistently for a well-staged performance. Surely our
profession, Mr. Mac, would be a drab and sordid one if we did
not sometimes set the scene so as to glorify our results. The
blunt accusation, the brutal tap upon the shoulder -- what can one
make of such a denouement? But the quick inference, the subtle
trap, the clever forecast of coming events, the triumphant vindication
of bold theories -- are these not the pride and the justification of
our life's work? At the present moment you thrill with the glamour of
the situation and the anticipation of the hunt. Where would be that
thrill if I had been as definite as a timetable? I only ask a little
patience, Mr. Mac, and all will be clear to you."

"Well, I hope the pride and justification and the rest of it will
come before we all get our death of cold," said the London
detective with comic resignation.

We all had good reason to join in the aspiration; for our vigil
was a long and bitter one. Slowly the shadows darkened over the
long, sombre face of the old house. A cold, damp reek from the
moat chilled us to the bones and set our teeth chattering. There
was a single lamp over the gateway and a steady globe of light in
the fatal study. Everything else was dark and still.

"How long is this to last?" asked the inspector finally. "And
what is it we are watching for?"

"I have no more notion than you how long it is to last,"
Holmes answered with some asperity. "If criminals would always
schedule their movements like railway trains, it would certainly
be more convenient for all of us. As to what it is we -- Well,
that's what we are watching for!"

As he spoke the bright, yellow light in the study was obscured
by somebody passing to and fro before it. The laurels among
which we lay were immediately opposite the window and not
more than a hundred feet from it. Presently it was thrown open
with a whining of hinges, and we could dimly see the dark
outline of a man's head and shoulders looking out into the
gloom. For some minutes he peered forth in furtive, stealthy
fashion, as one who wishes to be assured that he is unobserved.
Then he leaned forward, and in the intense silence we were
aware of the soft lapping of agitated water. He seemed to be
stirring up the moat with something which he held in his hand.
Then suddenly he hauled something in as a fisherman lands a
fish -- some large, round object which obscured the light as it
was dragged through the open casement.

"Now!" cried Holmes. "Now!"

We were all upon our feet, staggering after him with our
stiffened limbs, while he ran swiftly across the bridge and rang
violently at the bell. There was the rasping of bolts from the
other side, and the amazed Ames stood in the entrance. Holmes
brushed him aside without a word and, followed by all of us,
rushed into the room which had been occupied by the man whom
we had been watching.

The oil lamp on the table represented the glow which we had
seen from outside. It was now in the hand of Cecil Barker, who
held it towards us as we entered. Its light shone upon his strong,
resolute, clean-shaved face and his menacing eyes.

"What the devil is the meaning of all this?" he cried. "What
are you after, anyhow?"

Holmes took a swift glance round, and then pounced upon a
sodden bundle tied together with cord which lay where it had
been thrust under the writing table.

"This is what we are after, Mr. Barker -- this bundle, weighted
with a dumb-bell, which you have just raised from the bottom of
the moat."

Barker stared at Holmes with amazement in his face. "How in
thunder came you to know anything about it?" he asked.

"Simply that I put it there."

"You put it there! You!"

"Perhaps I should have said 'replaced it there,'" said Holmes.
"You will remember, Inspector MacDonald, that I was somewhat
struck by the absence of a dumb-bell. I drew your attention
to it; but with the pressure of other events you had hardly the
time to give it the consideration which would have enabled you
to draw deductions from it. When water is near and a weight is
missing it is not a very far-fetched supposition that something
has been sunk in the water. The idea was at least worth testing;
so with the help of Ames, who admitted me to the room, and the
crook of Dr. Watson's umbrella, I was able last night to fish up
and inspect this bundle.

"It was of the first importance, however, that we should be
able to prove who placed it there. This we accomplished by the
very obvious device of announcing that the moat would be dried
to-morrow, which had, of course, the effect that whoever had
hidden the bundle would most certainly withdraw it the moment
that darkness enabled him to do so. We have no less than four
witnesses as to who it was who took advantage of the opportunity,
and so, Mr. Barker, I think the word lies now with you."

Sherlock Holmes put the sopping bundle upon the table beside
the lamp and undid the cord which bound it. From within he
extracted a dumb-bell, which he tossed down to its fellow in the
corner. Next he drew forth a pair of boots. "American, as you
perceive," he remarked, pointing to the toes. Then he laid upon
the table a long, deadly, sheathed knife. Finally he unravelled a
bundle of clothing, comprising a complete set of underclothes,
socks, a gray tweed suit, and a short yellow overcoat.

"The clothes are commonplace," remarked Holmes, "save
only the overcoat, which is full of suggestive touches." He held
it tenderly towards the light. "Here, as you perceive, is the inner
pocket prolonged into the lining in such fashion as to give ample
space for the truncated fowling piece. The tailor's tab is on the
neck -- 'Neal, Outfitter, Vermissa, U. S. A.' I have spent an
instructive afternoon in the rector's library, and have enlarged
my knowledge by adding the fact that Vermissa is a flourishing
little town at the head of one of the best known coal and iron
valleys in the United States. I have some recollection, Mr.
Barker, that you associated the coal districts with Mr. Douglas's
first wife, and it would surely not be too far-fetched an inference
that the V. V. upon the card by the dead body might stand for
Vermissa Valley, or that this very valley which sends forth
emissaries of murder may be that Valley of Fear of which we
have heard. So much is fairly clear. And now, Mr. Barker, I
seem to be standing rather in the way of your explanation."

It was a sight to see Cecil Barker's expressive face during this
exposition of the great detective. Anger, amazement, consternation,
and indecision swept over it in turn. Finally he took refuge in a
somewhat acrid irony.

"You know such a lot, Mr. Holmes, perhaps you had better
tell us some more," he sneered.

"I have no doubt that I could tell you a great deal more, Mr.
Barker; but it would come with a better grace from you."

"Oh, you think so, do you? Well, all I can say is that if
there's any secret here it is not my secret, and I am not the man
to give it away."

"Well, if you take that line, Mr. Barker," said the inspector
quietly, "we must just keep you in sight until we have the
warrant and can hold you."

"You can do what you damn please about that," said Barker
defiantly.

The proceedings seemed to have come to a definite end so far
as he was concerned; for one had only to look at that granite face
to realize that no peine forte et dure would ever force him to
plead against his will. The deadlock was broken, however, by a
woman's voice. Mrs. Douglas had been standing listening at the
half opened door, and now she entered the room.

"You have done enough for now, Cecil," said she. "Whatever
comes of it in the future, you have done enough."

"Enough and more than enough," remarked Sherlock Holmes
gravely. "I have every sympathy with you, madam, and
should strongly urge you to have some confidence in the common
sense of our jurisdiction and to take the police voluntarily into
your complete confidence. It may be that I am myself at fault for
not following up the hint which you conveyed to me through my
friend, Dr. Watson; but, at that time I had every reason to
believe that you were directly concerned in the crime. Now I am
assured that this is not so. At the same time, there is much that is
unexplained, and I should strongly recommend that you ask Mr.
Douglas to tell us his own story."

Mrs. Douglas gave a cry of astonishment at Holmes's words.
The detectives and I must have echoed it, when we were aware
of a man who seemed to have emerged from the wall, who
advanced now from the gloom of the corner in which he had
appeared. Mrs. Douglas turned, and in an instant her arms were
round him. Barker had seized his outstretched hand.

"It's best this way, Jack," his wife repeated; "I am sure that
it is best."

"Indeed, yes, Mr. Douglas," said Sherlock Holmes, "I am
sure that you will find it best."

The man stood blinking at us with the dazed look of one who
comes from the dark into the light. It was a remarkable face,
bold gray eyes, a strong, short-clipped, grizzled moustache, a
square, projecting chin, and a humorous mouth. He took a good
look at us all, and then to my amazement he advanced to me and
handed me a bundle of paper.

"I've heard of you," said he in a voice which was not quite
English and not quite American, but was altogether mellow and
pleasing. "You are the historian of this bunch. Well, Dr. Watson,
you've never had such a story as that pass through your hands
before, and I'll lay my last dollar on that. Tell it your own
way; but there are the facts, and you can't miss the public so
long as you have those. I've been cooped up two days, and I've
spent the daylight hours -- as much daylight as I could get in that
rat trap -- in putting the thing into words. You're welcome to
them -- you and your public. There's the story of the Valley of
Fear."

"That's the past, Mr. Douglas," said Sherlock Holmes quietly.
"What we desire now is to hear your story of the present."

"You'll have it, sir," said Douglas. "May I smoke as I talk?
Well, thank you, Mr. Holmes. You're a smoker yourself, if I
remember right, and you'll guess what it is to be sitting for two
days with tobacco in your pocket and afraid that the smell will
give you away." He leaned against the mantelpiece and sucked
at the cigar which Holmes had handed him. "I've heard of you,
Mr. Holmes. I never guessed that I should meet you. But before
you are through with that," he nodded at my papers, "you will
say I've brought you something fresh."

Inspector MacDonald had been staring at the newcomer with
the greatest amazement. "Well, this fairly beats me!" he cried at
last. "If you are Mr. John Douglas of Birlstone Manor, then
whose death have we been investigating for these two days, and
where in the world have you sprung from now? You seemed to
me to come out of the floor like a jack-in-a-box."

"Ah, Mr. Mac," said Holmes, shaking a reproving forefinger,
"you would not read that excellent local compilation which
described the concealment of King Charles. People did not hide
in those days without excellent hiding places, and the hiding
place that has once been used may be again. I had persuaded
myself that we should find Mr. Douglas under this roof."

"And how long have you been playing this trick upon us, Mr.
Holmes?" said the inspector angrily. "How long have you
allowed us to waste ourselves upon a search that you knew to be
an absurd one?"

"Not one instant, my dear Mr. Mac. Only last night did I
form my views of the case. As they could not be put to the proof
until this evening, I invited you and your colleague to take a
holiday for the day. Pray what more could I do? When I found
the suit of clothes in the moat, it at once became apparent to me
that the body we had found could not have been the body of Mr.
John Douglas at all, but must be that of the bicyclist from
Tunbridge Wells. No other conclusion was possible. Therefore I
had to determine where Mr. John Douglas himself could be, and
the balance of probability was that with the connivance of his
wife and his friend he was concealed in a house which had such
conveniences for a fugitive, and awaiting quieter times when he
could make his final escape."

"Well, you figured it out about right," said Douglas approvingly.
"I thought I'd dodge your British law; for I was not sure how I
stood under it, and also I saw my chance to throw these hounds
once for all off my track. Mind you, from first to last I have
done nothing to be ashamed of, and nothing that I would not do
again; but you'll judge that for yourselves when I tell you my
story. Never mind warning me, Inspector: I'm ready to stand pat
upon the truth.

"I'm not going to begin at the beginning. That's all there," he
indicated my bundle of papers, "and a mighty queer yarn you'll
find it. It all comes down to this: That there are some men that
have good cause to hate me and would give their last dollar to
know that they had got me. So long as I am alive and they are
alive, there is no safety in this world for me. They hunted me
from Chicago to California, then they chased me out of America;
but when I married and settled down in this quiet spot I thought
my last years were going to be peaceable.

"I never explained to my wife how things were. Why should I
pull her into it? She would never have a quiet moment again; but
would always be imagining trouble. I fancy she knew something,
for I may have dropped a word here or a word there; but until
yesterday, after you gentlemen had seen her, she never knew the
rights of the matter. She told you all she knew, and so did
Barker here; for on the night when this thing happened there was
mighty little time for explanations. She knows everything now,
and I would have been a wiser man if I had told her sooner. But
it was a hard question, dear," he took her hand for an instant in
his own, "and I acted for the best.

"Well, gentlemen, the day before these happenings I was over
in Tunbridge Wells, and I got a glimpse of a man in the street. It
was only a glimpse; but I have a quick eye for these things, and I
never doubted who it was. It was the worst enemy I had among
them all -- one who has been after me like a hungry wolf after a
caribou all these years. I knew there was trouble coming, and I
came home and made ready for it. I guessed I'd fight through it
all right on my own, my luck was a proverb in the States about
'76. I never doubted that it would be with me still.

"I was on my guard all that next day, and never went out into
the park. It's as well, or he'd have had the drop on me with that
buckshot gun of his before ever I could draw on him. After the
bridge was up -- my mind was always more restful when that
bridge was up in the evenings -- I put the thing clear out of my
head. I never dreamed of his getting into the house and waiting
for me. But when I made my round in my dressing gown, as was
my habit, I had no sooner entered the study than I scented
danger. I guess when a man has had dangers in his life -- and I've
had more than most in my time -- there is a kind of sixth sense
that waves the red flag. I saw the signal clear enough, and yet I
couldn't tell you why. Next instant I spotted a boot under the
window curtain, and then I saw why plain enough.

"I'd just the one candle that was in my hand; but there was a
good light from the hall lamp through the open door. I put down
the candle and jumped for a hammer that I'd left on the mantel.
At the same moment he sprang at me. I saw the glint of a knife,
and I lashed at him with the hammer. I got him somewhere; for
the knife tinkled down on the floor. He dodged round the table
as quick as an eel, and a moment later he'd got his gun from
under his coat. I heard him cock it; but I had got hold of it before
he could fire. I had it by the barrel, and we wrestled for it all
ends up for a minute or more. It was death to the man that lost
his grip.

"He never lost his grip; but he got it butt downward for a
moment too long. Maybe it was I that pulled the trigger. Maybe
we just jolted it off between us. Anyhow, he got both barrels in
the face, and there I was, staring down at all that was left of Ted
Baldwin. I'd recognized him in the township, and again when he
sprang for me; but his own mother wouldn't recognize him as I
saw him then. I'm used to rough work; but I fairly turned sick at
the sight of him.

"I was hanging on the side of the table when Barker came
hurrying down. I heard my wife coming, and I ran to the door
and stopped her. It was no sight for a woman. I promised I'd
come to her soon. I said a word or two to Barker -- he took it all
in at a glance -- and we waited for the rest to come along. But
there was no sign of them. Then we understood that they could
hear nothing, and that all that had happened was known only to
ourselves.

"It was at that instant that the idea came to me. I was fairly
dazzled by the brilliance of it. The man's sleeve had slipped up
and there was the branded mark of the lodge upon his forearm.
See here!"

The man whom we had known as Douglas turned up his own
coat and cuff to show a brown triangle within a circle exactly
like that which we had seen upon the dead man.

"It was the sight of that which started me on it. I seemed to
see it all clear at a glance. There were his height and hair and
figure, about the same as my own. No one could swear to his
face, poor devil! I brought down this suit of clothes, and in a
quarter of an hour Barker and I had put my dressing gown on
him and he lay as you found him. We tied all his things into a
bundle, and I weighted them with the only weight I could find
and put them through the window. The card he had meant to lay
upon my body was lying beside his own.

"My rings were put on his finger; but when it came to the
wedding ring," he held out his muscular hand, "you can see for
yourselves that I had struck the limit. I have not moved it since
the day I was married, and it would have taken a file to get it
off. I don't know, anyhow, that I should have cared to part with
it; but if I had wanted to I couldn't. So we just had to leave that
detail to take care of itself. On the other hand, I brought a bit of
plaster down and put it where I am wearing one myself at this
instant. You slipped up there, Mr. Holmes, clever as you are; for
if you had chanced to take off that plaster you would have found
no cut underneath it.

"Well, that was the situation. If I could lie low for a while
and then get away where I could be joined by my 'widow' we
should have a chance at last of living in peace for the rest of our
lives. These devils would give me no rest so long as I was above
ground; but if they saw in the papers that Baldwin had got his
man, there would be an end of all my troubles. I hadn't much
time to make it all clear to Barker and to my wife; but they
understood enough to be able to help me. I knew all about this
hiding place, so did Ames; but it never entered his head to
connect it with the matter. I retired into it, and it was up to
Barker to do the rest.

"I guess you can fill in for yourselves what he did. He opened
the window and made the mark on the sill to give an idea of how
the murderer escaped. It was a tall order, that; but as the bridge
was up there was no other way. Then, when everything was
fixed, he rang the bell for all he was worth. What happened
afterward you know. And so, gentlemen, you can do what you
please; but I've told you the truth and the whole truth, so help
me God! What I ask you now is how do I stand by the English
law?"

There was a silence which was broken by Sherlock Holmes.

"The English law is in the main a just law. You will get no
worse than your deserts from that, Mr. Douglas. But I would ask
you how did this man know that you lived here, or how to get
into your house, or where to hide to get you?"

"I know nothing of this."

Holmes's face was very white and grave. "The story is not
over yet, I fear," said he. "You may find worse dangers than
the English law, or even than your enemies from America. I see
trouble before you, Mr. Douglas. You'll take my advice and still
be on your guard."

And now, my long-suffering readers, I will ask you to come
away with me for a time, far from the Sussex Manor House of
Birlstone, and far also from the year of grace in which we made
our eventful journey which ended with the strange story of the
man who had been known as John Douglas. I wish you to
journey back some twenty years in time, and westward some
thousands of miles in space, that I may lay before you a singular
and terrible narrative -- so singular and so terrible that you may
find it hard to believe that even as I tell it, even so did it occur.

Do not think that I intrude one story before another is finished.
As you read on you will find that this is not so. And when I have
detailed those distant events and you have solved this mystery of
the past, we shall meet once more in those rooms on Baker
Street, where this, like so many other wonderful happenings,
will find its end.




PART 2
The Scowrers



Chapter 1
The Man

It was the fourth of February in the year 1875. It had been a
severe winter, and the snow lay deep in the gorges of the
Gilmerton Mountains. The steam ploughs had, however, kept the
railroad open, and the evening train which connects the long line
of coal-mining and iron-working settlements was slowly groaning
its way up the steep gradients which lead from Stagville on the
plain to Vermissa, the central township which lies at the head of
Vermissa Valley. From this point the track sweeps downward to
Bartons Crossing, Helmdale, and the purely agricultural county of
Merton. It was a single-track railroad; but at every siding --
and they were numerous -- long lines of trucks piled with coal
and iron ore told of the hidden wealth which had brought a rude
population and a bustling life to this most desolate corner of the
United States of America.

For desolate it was! Little could the first pioneer who had
traversed it have ever imagined that the fairest prairies and the
most lush water pastures were valueless compared to this gloomy
land of black crag and tangled forest. Above the dark and often
scarcely penetrable woods upon their flanks, the high, bare
crowns of the mountains, white snow, and jagged rock towered
upon each flank, leaving a long, winding, tortuous valley in the
centre. Up this the little train was slowly crawling.

The oil lamps had just been lit in the leading passenger car, a
long, bare carriage in which some twenty or thirty people were
seated. The greater number of these were workmen returning
from their day's toil in the lower part of the valley. At least a
dozen, by their grimed faces and the safety lanterns which they
carried, proclaimed themselves miners. These sat smoking in a
group and conversed in low voices, glancing occasionally at two
men on the opposite side of the car, whose uniforms and badges
showed them to be policemen.

Several women of the labouring class and one or two travellers
who might have been small local storekeepers made up the rest
of the company, with the exception of one young man in a
corner by himself. It is with this man that we are concerned.
Take a good look at him, for he is worth it.

He is a fresh-complexioned, middle-sized young man, not far,
one would guess, from his thirtieth year. He has large, shrewd,
humorous gray eyes which twinkle inquiringly from time to time
as he looks round through his spectacles at the people about him.
It is easy to see that he is of a sociable and possibly simple
disposition, anxious to be friendly to all men. Anyone could pick
him at once as gregarious in his habits and communicative in his
nature, with a quick wit and a ready smile. And yet the man who
studied him more closely might discern a certain firmness of jaw
and grim tightness about the lips which would warn him that
there were depths beyond, and that this pleasant, brown-haired
young Irishman might conceivably leave his mark for good or
evil upon any society to which he was introduced.

Having made one or two tentative remarks to the nearest
miner, and receiving only short, gruff replies, the traveller
resigned himself to uncongenial silence, staring moodily out
of the window at the fading landscape.

It was not a cheering prospect. Through the growing gloom
there pulsed the red glow of the furnaces on the sides of the hills.
Great heaps of slag and dumps of cinders loomed up on each
side, with the high shafts of the collieries towering above them.
Huddled groups of mean, wooden houses, the windows of which
were beginning to outline themselves in light, were scattered
here and there along the line, and the frequent halting places
were crowded with their swarthy inhabitants.

The iron and coal valleys of the Vermissa district were no
resorts for the leisured or the cultured. Everywhere there were
stern signs of the crudest battle of life, the rude work to be
done, and the rude, strong workers who did it.

The young traveller gazed out into this dismal country with a
face of mingled repulsion and interest, which showed that the
scene was new to him. At intervals he drew from his pocket a
bulky letter to which he referred, and on the margins of which
he scribbled some notes. Once from the back of his waist he
produced something which one would hardly have expected to
find in the possession of so mild-mannered a man. It was a navy
revolver of the largest size. As he turned it slantwise to the
light, the glint upon the rims of the copper shells within the
drum showed that it was fully loaded. He quickly restored it to
his secret pocket, but not before it had been observed by a
working man who had seated himself upon the adjoining bench.

"Hullo, mate!" said he. "You seem heeled and ready."

The young man smiled with an air of embarrassment.

"Yes," said he, "we need them sometimes in the place I
come from."

"And where may that be?"

"I'm last from Chicago."

"A stranger in these parts?"

"Yes."

"You may find you need it here," said the workman.

"Ah! is that so?" The young man seemed interested.

"Have you heard nothing of doings hereabouts?"

"Nothing out of the way."

"Why, I thought the country was full of it. You'll hear quick
enough. What made you come here?"

"I heard there was always work for a willing man."

"Are you a member of the union?"

"Sure."

"Then you'll get your job, I guess. Have you any friends?"

"Not yet; but I have the means of making them."

"How's that, then?"

"I am one of the Eminent Order of Freemen. There's no town
without a lodge, and where there is a lodge I'll find my friends."

The remark had a singular effect upon his companion. He
glanced round suspiciously at the others in the car. The miners
were still whispering among themselves. The two police officers
were dozing. He came across, seated himself close to the young
traveller, and held out his hand.

"Put it there," he said.

A hand-grip passed between the two.

"I see you speak the truth," said the workman. "But it's well
to make certain." He raised his right hand to his right eyebrow.
The traveller at once raised his left hand to his left eyebrow.

"Dark nights are unpleasant," said the workman.

"Yes, for strangers to travel," the other answered.

"That's good enough. I'm Brother Scanlan, Lodge 341,
Vermissa Valley. Glad to see you in these parts."

"Thank you. I'm Brother John McMurdo, Lodge 29, Chicago.
Bodymaster J. H. Scott. But I am in luck to meet a brother
so early."

"Well, there are plenty of us about. You won't find the order
more flourishing anywhere in the States than right here in Vermissa
Valley. But we could do with some lads like you. I can't
understand a spry man of the union finding no work to do in
Chicago."

"I found plenty of work to do," said McMurdo.

"Then why did you leave?"

McMurdo nodded towards the policemen and smiled. "I guess
those chaps would be glad to know," he said.

Scanlan groaned sympathetically. "In trouble?" he asked in a
whisper.

"Deep."

"A penitentiary job?"

"And the rest."

"Not a killing!"

"It's early days to talk of such things," said McMurdo with
the air of a man who had been surprised into saying more than he
intended. "I've my own good reasons for leaving Chicago, and
let that be enough for you. Who are you that you should take it
on yourself to ask such things?" His gray eyes gleamed with
sudden and dangerous anger from behind his glasses.

"All right, mate, no offense meant. The boys will think none
the worse of you, whatever you may have done. Where are you
bound for now?"

"Vermissa."

"That's the third halt down the line. Where are you staying?"

McMurdo took out an envelope and held it close to the murky
oil lamp. "Here is the address -- Jacob Shafter, Sheridan Street.
It's a boarding house that was recommended by a man I knew in
Chicago."

"Well, I don't know it; but Vermissa is out of my beat. I live
at Hobson's Patch, and that's here where we are drawing up.
But, say, there's one bit of advice I'll give you before we part: If
you're in trouble in Vermissa, go straight to the Union House
and see Boss McGinty. He is the Bodymaster of Vermissa
Lodge, and nothing can happen in these parts unless Black Jack
McGinty wants it. So long, mate! Maybe we'll meet in lodge
one of these evenings. But mind my words: If you are in trouble,
go to Boss McGinty."

Scanlan descended, and McMurdo was left once again to his
thoughts. Night had now fallen, and the flames of the frequent
furnaces were roaring and leaping in the darkness. Against their
lurid background dark figures were bending and straining, twisting
and turning, with the motion of winch or of windlass, to the
rhythm of an eternal clank and roar.

"I guess hell must look something like that," said a voice.

McMurdo turned and saw that one of the policemen had
shifted in his seat and was staring out into the fiery waste.

"For that matter," said the other policeman, "I allow that hell
must be something like that. If there are worse devils down
yonder than some we could name, it's more than I'd expect. I
guess you are new to this part, young man?"

"Well, what if I am?" McMurdo answered in a surly voice.

"Just this, mister, that I should advise you to be careful in
choosing your friends. I don't think I'd begin with Mike Scanlan
or his gang if I were you."

"What the hell is it to you who are my friends?" roared
McMurdo in a voice which brought every head in the carriage
round to witness the altercation. "Did I ask you for your advice,
or did you think me such a sucker that I couldn't move without
it? You speak when you are spoken to, and by the Lord you'd
have to wait a long time if it was me!" He thrust out his face and
grinned at the patrolmen like a snarling dog.

The two policemen, heavy, good-natured men, were taken
aback by the extraordinary vehemence with which their friendly
advances had been rejected.

"No offense, stranger," said one. "It was a warning for your
own good, seeing that you are, by your own showing, new to the
place."

"I'm new to the place; but I'm not new to you and your
kind!" cried McMurdo in cold fury. "I guess you're the same in
all places, shoving your advice in when nobody asks for it."

"Maybe we'll see more of you before very long," said one of
the patrolmen with a grin. "You're a real hand-picked one, if I
am a judge."

"I was thinking the same," remarked the other. "I guess we
may meet again."

"I'm not afraid of you, and don't you think it!" cried McMurdo.
"My name's Jack McMurdo -- see? If you want me, you'll find
me at Jacob Shafter's on Sheridan Street, Vermissa; so I'm not
hiding from you, am I? Day or night I dare to look the like of
you in the face -- don't make any mistake about that!"

There was a murmur of sympathy and admiration from the
miners at the dauntless demeanour of the newcomer, while the
two policemen shrugged their shoulders and renewed a
conversation between themselves.

A few minutes later the train ran into the ill-lit station, and
there was a general clearing; for Vermissa was by far the largest
town on the line. McMurdo picked up his leather gripsack and
was about to start off into the darkness, when one of the miners
accosted him.

"By Gar, mate! you know how to speak to the cops," he said
in a voice of awe. "It was grand to hear you. Let me carry your
grip and show you the road. I'm passing Shafter's on the way to
my own shack."

There was a chorus of friendly "Good-nights" from the other
miners as they passed from the platform. Before ever he had set
foot in it, McMurdo the turbulent had become a character in
Vermissa.

The country had been a place of terror; but the town was in its
way even more depressing. Down that long valley there was at
least a certain gloomy grandeur in the huge fires and the clouds
of drifting smoke, while the strength and industry of man found
fitting monuments in the hills which he had spilled by the side of
his monstrous excavations. But the town showed a dead level of
mean ugliness and squalor. The broad street was churned up by
the traffic into a horrible rutted paste of muddy snow. The
sidewalks were narrow and uneven. The numerous gas-lamps
served only to show more clearly a long line of wooden houses,
each with its veranda facing the street, unkempt and dirty.

As they approached the centre of the town the scene was
brightened by a row of well-lit stores, and even more by a cluster
of saloons and gaming houses, in which the miners spent their
hard-earned but generous wages.

"That's the Union House," said the guide, pointing to one
saloon which rose almost to the dignity of being a hotel. "Jack
McGinty is the boss there."

"What sort of a man is he?" McMurdo asked.

"What! have you never heard of the boss?"

"How could I have heard of him when you know that I am a
stranger in these parts?"

"Well, I thought his name was known clear across the country.
It's been in the papers often enough."

"What for?"

"Well," the miner lowered his voice -- "over the affairs."

"What affairs?"

"Good Lord, mister! you are queer, if I must say it without
offense. There's only one set of affairs that you'll hear of in
these parts, and that's the affairs of the Scowrers."

"Why, I seem to have read of the Scowrers in Chicago. A
gang of murderers, are they not?"

"Hush, on your life!" cried the miner, standing still in alarm,
and gazing in amazement at his companion. "Man, you won't
live long in these parts if you speak in the open street like that.
Many a man has had the life beaten out of him for less."

"Well, I know nothing about them. It's only what I have
read."

"And I'm not saying that you have not read the truth." The
man looked nervously round him as he spoke, peering into the
shadows as if he feared to see some lurking danger. "If killing is
murder, then God knows there is murder and to spare. But don't
you dare to breathe the name of Jack McGinty in connection
with it, stranger; for every whisper goes back to him, and he is
not one that is likely to let it pass. Now, that's the house you're
after, that one standing back from the street. You'll find old
Jacob Shafter that runs it as honest a man as lives in this
township."

"I thank you," said McMurdo, and shaking hands with his
new acquaintance he plodded, gripsack in hand, up the path
which led to the dwelling house, at the door of which he gave a
resounding knock.

It was opened at once by someone very different from what he
had expected. It was a woman, young and singularly beautiful.
She was of the German type, blonde and fair-haired, with the
piquant contrast of a pair of beautiful dark eyes with which she
surveyed the stranger with surprise and a pleasing embarrassment
which brought a wave of colour over her pale face. Framed in
the bright light of the open doorway, it seemed to McMurdo that
he had never seen a more beautiful picture; the more attractive
for its contrast with the sordid and gloomy surroundings. A
lovely violet growing upon one of those black slag-heaps of the
mines would not have seemed more surprising. So entranced was
he that he stood staring without a word, and it was she who
broke the silence.

"I thought it was father," said she with a pleasing little touch
of a German accent. "Did you come to see him? He is downtown.
I expect him back every minute."

McMurdo continued to gaze at her in open admiration until
her eyes dropped in confusion before this masterful visitor.

"No, miss," he said at last, "I'm in no hurry to see him. But
your house was recommended to me for board. I thought it might
suit me -- and now I know it will."

"You are quick to make up your mind," said she with a
smile.

"Anyone but a blind man could do as much," the other
answered.

She laughed at the compliment. "Come right in, sir," she
said. "I'm Miss Ettie Shafter, Mr. Shafter's daughter. My mother's
dead, and I run the house. You can sit down by the stove in the
front room until father comes along -- Ah, here he is! So you can
fix things with him right away."

A heavy, elderly man came plodding up the path. In a few
words McMurdo explained his business. A man of the name of
Murphy had given him the address in Chicago. He in turn had
had it from someone else. Old Shafter was quite ready. The
stranger made no bones about terms, agreed at once to every
condition, and was apparently fairly flush of money. For seven
dollars a week paid in advance he was to have board and
lodging.

So it was that McMurdo, the self-confessed fugitive from
justice, took up his abode under the roof of the Shafters, the first
step which was to lead to so long and dark a train of events,
ending in a far distant land.



Chapter 2
The Bodymaster

McMurdo was a man who made his mark quickly. Wherever he
was the folk around soon knew it. Within a week he had become
infinitely the most important person at Shafter's. There were ten
or a dozen boarders there; but they were honest foremen or
commonplace clerks from the stores, of a very different calibre
from the young Irishman. Of an evening when they gathered
together his joke was always the readiest, his conversation the
brightest, and his song the best. He was a born boon companion,
with a magnetism which drew good humour from all around
him.

And yet he showed again and again, as he had shown in the
railway carriage, a capacity for sudden, fierce anger, which
compelled the respect and even the fear of those who met him.
For the law, too, and all who were connected with it, he
exhibited a bitter contempt which delighted some and alarmed
others of his fellow boarders.

From the first he made it evident, by his open admiration, that
the daughter of the house had won his heart from the instant that
he had set eyes upon her beauty and her grace. He was no
backward suitor. On the second day he told her that he loved
her, and from then onward he repeated the same story with an
absolute disregard of what she might say to discourage him.

"Someone else?" he would cry. "Well, the worse luck for
someone else! Let him look out for himself! Am I to lose my
life's chance and all my heart's desire for someone else? You
can keep on saying no, Ettie: the day will come when you will
say yes, and I'm young enough to wait."

He was a dangerous suitor, with his glib Irish tongue, and his
pretty, coaxing ways. There was about him also that glamour of
experience and of mystery which attracts a woman's interest, and
finally her love. He could talk of the sweet valleys of County
Monaghan from which he came, of the lovely, distant island, the
low hills and green meadows of which seemed the more beautiful
when imagination viewed them from this place of grime and snow.

Then he was versed in the life of the cities of the North, of
Detroit, and the lumber camps of Michigan, and finally of
Chicago, where he had worked in a planing mill. And afterwards
came the hint of romance, the feeling that strange things had
happened to him in that great city, so strange and so intimate that
they might not be spoken of. He spoke wistfully of a sudden
leaving, a breaking of old ties, a flight into a strange world,
ending in this dreary valley, and Ettie listened, her dark eyes
gleaming with pity and with sympathy -- those two qualities which
may turn so rapidly and so naturally to love.

McMurdo had obtained a temporary job as bookkeeper; for he
was a well-educated man. This kept him out most of the day, and
he had not found occasion yet to report himself to the head of the
lodge of the Eminent Order of Freemen. He was reminded of his
omission, however, by a visit one evening from Mike Scanlan,
the fellow member whom he had met in the train. Scanlan, the
small, sharp-faced, nervous, black-eyed man, seemed glad to see
him once more. After a glass or two of whisky he broached the
object of his visit.

"Say, McMurdo," said he, "I remembered your address, so l
made bold to call. I'm surprised that you've not reported to the
Bodymaster. Why haven't you seen Boss McGinty yet?"

"Well, I had to find a job. I have been busy."

"You must find time for him if you have none for anything
else. Good Lord, man! you're a fool not to have been down to
the Union House and registered your name the first morning after
you came here! If you run against him -- well, you mustn't, that's
all!"

McMurdo showed mild surprise. "I've been a member of the
lodge for over two years, Scanlan, but I never heard that duties
were so pressing as all that."

"Maybe not in Chicago."

"Well, it's the same society here."

"Is it?"

Scanlan looked at him long and fixedly. There was something
sinister in his eyes.

"Isn't it?"

"You'll tell me that in a month's time. I hear you had a talk
with the patrolmen after I left the train."

"How did you know that?"

"Oh, it got about -- things do get about for good and for bad in
this district."

"Well, yes. I told the hounds what I thought of them."

"By the Lord, you'll be a man after McGinty's heart!"

"What, does he hate the police too?"

Scanlan burst out laughing. "You go and see him, my lad,"
said he as he took his leave. "It's not the police but you that
he'll hate if you don't! Now, take a friend's advice and go at
once!"

It chanced that on the same evening McMurdo had another
more pressing interview which urged him in the same direction.
It may have been that his attentions to Ettie had been more
evident than before, or that they had gradually obtruded
themselves into the slow mind of his good German host; but,
whatever the cause, the boarding-house keeper beckoned the young
man into his private room and started on the subject without any
circumlocution.

"It seems to me, mister," said he, "that you are gettin' set on
my Ettie. Ain't that so, or am I wrong?"

"Yes, that is so," the young man answered.

"Vell, I vant to tell you right now that it ain't no manner of
use. There's someone slipped in afore you."

"She told me so."

"Vell, you can lay that she told you truth. But did she tell you
who it vas?"

"No, I asked her; but she wouldn't tell."

"I dare say not, the leetle baggage! Perhaps she did not vish
to frighten you avay."

"Frighten!" McMurdo was on fire in a moment.

"Ah, yes, my friend! You need not be ashamed to be frightened
of him. It is Teddy Baldwin."

"And who the devil is he?"

"He is a boss of Scowrers."

"Scowrers! I've heard of them before. It's Scowrers here and
Scowrers there, and always in a whisper! What are you all afraid
of? Who are the Scowrers?"

The boarding-house keeper instinctively sank his voice, as
everyone did who talked about that terrible society. "The
Scowrers," said he, "are the Eminent Order of Freemen!"

The young man stared. "Why, I am a member of that order
myself."

"You! I vould never have had you in my house if I had known
it -- not if you vere to pay me a hundred dollar a week."

"What's wrong with the order? It's for charity and good
fellowship. The rules say so."

"Maybe in some places. Not here!"

"What is it here?"

"It's a murder society, that's vat it is."

McMurdo laughed incredulously. "How can you prove that?"
he asked.

"Prove it! Are there not fifty murders to prove it? Vat about
Milman and Van Shorst, and the Nicholson family, and old Mr.
Hyam, and little Billy James, and the others? Prove it! Is there a
man or a voman in this valley vat does not know it?"

"See here!" said McMurdo earnestly. "I want you to take
back what you've said, or else make it good. One or the other
you must do before I quit this room. Put yourself in my place.
Here am I, a stranger in the town. I belong to a society that I
know only as an innocent one. You'll find it through the length
and breadth of the States, but always as an innocent one. Now,
when I am counting upon joining it here, you tell me that it is the
same as a murder society called the Scowrers. I guess you owe
me either an apology or else an explanation, Mr. Shafter."

"I can but tell you vat the whole vorld knows, mister. The
bosses of the one are the bosses of the other. If you offend the
one, it is the other vat vill strike you. We have proved it too
often."

"That's just gossip -- I want proof!" said McMurdo.

"If you live here long you vill get your proof. But I forget that
you are yourself one of them. You vill soon be as bad as the rest.
But you vill find other lodgings, mister. I cannot have you here.
Is it not bad enough that one of these people come courting my
Ettie, and that I dare not turn him down, but that I should have
another for my boarder? Yes, indeed, you shall not sleep here
after to-night!"

McMurdo found himself under sentence of banishment both
from his comfortable quarters and from the girl whom he loved.
He found her alone in the sitting-room that same evening, and he
poured his troubles into her ear.

"Sure, your father is after giving me notice," he said. "It's
little I would care if it was just my room, but indeed, Ettie,
though it's only a week that I've known you, you are the very
breath of life to me, and I can't live without you!"

"Oh, hush, Mr. McMurdo, don't speak so!" said the girl. "I
have told you, have I not, that you are too late? There is another,
and if I have not promised to marry him at once, at least I can
promise no one else."

"Suppose I had been first, Ettie, would I have had a chance?"

The girl sank her face into her hands. "I wish to heaven that
you had been first!" she sobbed.

McMurdo was down on his knees before her in an instant.
"For God's sake, Ettie, let it stand at that!" he cried. "Will you
ruin your life and my own for the sake of this promise? Follow
your heart, acushla! 'Tis a safer guide than any promise before
you knew what it was that you were saying."

He had seized Ettie's white hand between his own strong
brown ones.

"Say that you will be mine, and we will face it out together!"

"Not here?"

"Yes, here."

"No, no, Jack!" His arms were round her now. "It could not
be here. Could you take me away?"

A struggle passed for a moment over McMurdo's face; but it
ended by setting like granite. "No, here," he said. "I'll hold
you against the world, Ettie, right here where we are!"

"Why should we not leave together?"

"No, Ettie, I can't leave here."

"But why?"

"I'd never hold my head up again if I felt that I had been
driven out. Besides, what is there to be afraid of? Are we not
free folks in a free country? If you love me, and I you, who will
dare to come between?"

"You don't know, Jack. You've been here too short a time.
You don't know this Baldwin. You don't know McGinty and his
Scowrers."

"No, I don't know them, and I don't fear them, and I don't
believe in them!" said McMurdo. "I've lived among rough
men, my darling, and instead of fearing them it has always
ended that they have feared me -- always, Ettie. It's mad on the
face of it! If these men, as your father says, have done crime
after crime in the valley, and if everyone knows them by name,
how comes it that none are brought to justice? You answer me
that, Ettie!"

"Because no witness dares to appear against them. He would
not live a month if he did. Also because they have always their
own men to swear that the accused one was far from the scene of
the crime. But surely, Jack, you must have read all this. I had
understood that every paper in the United States was writing
about it."

"Well, I have read something, it is true; but I had thought it
was a story. Maybe these men have some reason in what they
do. Maybe they are wronged and have no other way to help
themselves."

"Oh, Jack, don't let me hear you speak so! That is how he
speaks -- the other one!"

"Baldwin -- he speaks like that, does he?"

"And that is why I loathe him so. Oh, Jack, now I can tell
you the truth. I loathe him with all my heart; but I fear him also.
I fear him for myself; but above all I fear him for father. I know
that some great sorrow would come upon us if I dared to say
what I really felt. That is why I have put him off with half-
promises. It was in real truth our only hope. But if you would fly
with me, Jack, we could take father with us and live forever far
from the power of these wicked men."

Again there was the struggle upon McMurdo's face, and again
it set like granite. "No harm shall come to you, Ettie -- nor to
your father either. As to wicked men, I expect you may find that
I am as bad as the worst of them before we're through."

"No, no, Jack! I would trust you anywhere."

McMurdo laughed bitterly. "Good Lord! how little you know
of me! Your innocent soul, my darling, could not even guess
what is passing in mine. But, hullo, who's the visitor?"

The door had opened suddenly, and a young fellow came
swaggering in with the air of one who is the master. He was a
handsome, dashing young man of about the same age and build as
McMurdo himself. Under his broad-brimmed black felt hat,
which he had not troubled to remove, a handsome face with
fierce, domineering eyes and a curved hawk-bill of a nose looked
savagely at the pair who sat by the stove.

Ettie had jumped to her feet full of confusion and alarm. "I'm
glad to see you, Mr. Baldwin," said she. "You're earlier than I
had thought. Come and sit down."

Baldwin stood with his hands on his hips looking at McMurdo.
"Who is this?" he asked curtly.

"It's a friend of mine, Mr. Baldwin, a new boarder here. Mr.
McMurdo, may I introduce you to Mr. Baldwin?"

The young men nodded in surly fashion to each other.

"Maybe Miss Ettie has told you how it is with us?" said
Baldwin.

"I didn't understand that there was any relation between
you."

"Didn't you? Well, you can understand it now. You can take
it from me that this young lady is mine, and you'll find it a very
fine evening for a walk."

"Thank you, I am in no humour for a walk."

"Aren't you?" The man's savage eyes were blazing with
anger. "Maybe you are in a humour for a fight, Mr. Boarder!"

"That I am!" cried McMurdo, springing to his feet. "You
never said a more welcome word."

"For God's sake, Jack! Oh, for God's sake!" cried poor,
distracted Ettie. "Oh, Jack, Jack, he will hurt you!"

"Oh, it's Jack, is it?" said Baldwin with an oath. "You've
come to that already, have you?"

"Oh, Ted, be reasonable -- be kind! For my sake, Ted, if ever
you loved me, be big-hearted and forgiving!"

"I think, Ettie, that if you were to leave us alone we could get
this thing settled," said McMurdo quietly. "Or maybe, Mr.
Baldwin, you will take a turn down the street with me. It's a fine
evening, and there's some open ground beyond the next block."

"I'll get even with you without needing to dirty my hands,"
said his enemy. "You'll wish you had never set foot in this
house before I am through with you!"

"No time like the present," cried McMurdo.

"I'll choose my own time, mister. You can leave the time to
me. See here!" He suddenly rolled up his sleeve and showed
upon his forearm a peculiar sign which appeared to have been
branded there. It was a circle with a triangle within it. "D'you
know what that means?"

"I neither know nor care!"

"Well, you will know, I'll promise you that. You won't be
much older, either. Perhaps Miss Ettie can tell you something
about it. As to you, Ettie, you'll come back to me on your
knees -- d'ye hear, girl? -- on your knees -- and then I'll tell you
what your punishment may be. You've sowed -- and by the Lord,
I'll see that you reap!" He glanced at them both in fury. Then he
turned upon his heel, and an instant later the outer door had
banged behind him.

For a few moments McMurdo and the girl stood in silence.
Then she threw her arms around him.

"Oh, Jack, how brave you were! But it is no use, you must
fly! To-night -- Jack -- to-night! It's your only hope. He will have
your life. I read it in his horrible eyes. What chance have you
against a dozen of them, with Boss McGinty and all the power of
the lodge behind them?"

McMurdo disengaged her hands, kissed her, and gently pushed
her back into a chair. "There, acushla, there! Don't be disturbed
or fear for me. I'm a Freeman myself. I'm after telling your
father about it. Maybe I am no better than the others; so don't
make a saint of me. Perhaps you hate me too, now that I've told
you as much?"

"Hate you, Jack? While life lasts I could never do that! I've
heard that there is no harm in being a Freeman anywhere but
here; so why should I think the worse of you for that? But if you
are a Freeman, Jack, why should you not go down and make a
friend of Boss McGinty? Oh, hurry, Jack, hurry! Get your word
in first, or the hounds will be on your trail."

"I was thinking the same thing," said McMurdo. "I'll go
right now and fix it. You can tell your father that I'll sleep here
to-night and find some other quarters in the morning."

The bar of McGinty's saloon was crowded as usual, for it was
the favourite loafing place of all the rougher elements of the
town. The man was popular; for he had a rough, jovial disposition
which formed a mask, covering a great deal which lay behind it.
But apart from this popularity, the fear in which he was held
throughout the township, and indeed down the whole thirty miles
of the valley and past the mountains on each side of it, was
enough in itself to fill his bar; for none could afford to neglect
his good will.

Besides those secret powers which it was universally believed
that he exercised in so pitiless a fashion, he was a high public
official, a municipal councillor, and a commissioner of roads,
elected to the office through the votes of the ruffians who in turn
expected to receive favours at his hands. Assessments and taxes
were enormous; the public works were notoriously neglected, the
accounts were slurred over by bribed auditors, and the decent
citizen was terrorized into paying public blackmail, and holding
his tongue lest some worse thing befall him.

Thus it was that, year by year, Boss McGinty's diamond pins
became more obtrusive, his gold chains more weighty across a
more gorgeous vest, and his saloon stretched farther and farther,
until it threatened to absorb one whole side of the Market Square.

McMurdo pushed open the swinging door of the saloon and made his way
amid the crowd of men within, through an atmosphere blurred with
tobacco smoke and heavy with the smell of spirits. The place was
brilliantly lighted, and the huge, heavily gilt mirrors upon every
wall reflected and multiplied the garish illumination. There were
several bartenders in their shirt sleeves, hard at work mixing drinks
for the loungers who fringed the broad, brass-trimmed counter.

At the far end, with his body resting upon the bar and a cigar
stuck at an acute angle from the corner of his mouth, stood a tall,
strong, heavily built man who could be none other than the
famous McGinty himself. He was a black-maned giant, bearded
to the cheek-bones, and with a shock of raven hair which fell to
his collar. His complexion was as swarthy as that of an Italian,
and his eyes were of a strange dead black, which, combined with
a slight squint, gave them a particularly sinister appearance.

All else in the man -- his noble proportions, his fine features,
and his frank bearing -- fitted in with that jovial, man-to-man
manner which he affected. Here, one would say, is a bluff,
honest fellow, whose heart would be sound however rude his
outspoken words might seem. It was only when those dead, dark
eyes, deep and remorseless, were turned upon a man that he
shrank within himself, feeling that he was face to face with an
infinite possibility of latent evil, with a strength and courage and
cunning behind it which made it a thousand times more deadly.

Having had a good look at his man, McMurdo elbowed his way forward
with his usual careless audacity, and pushed himself through the
little group of courtiers who were fawning upon the powerful boss,
laughing uproariously at the smallest of his jokes. The young
stranger's bold gray eyes looked back fearlessly through their
glasses at the deadly black ones which turned sharply upon him.

"Well, young man, I can't call your face to mind."

"I'm new here, Mr. McGinty."

"You are not so new that you can't give a gentleman his
proper title."

"He's Councillor McGinty, young man," said a voice from
the group.

"I'm sorry, Councillor. I'm strange to the ways of the place.
But I was advised to see you."

"Well, you see me. This is all there is. What d'you think of
me?"

"Well, it's early days. If your heart is as big as your body, and
your soul as fine as your face, then I'd ask for nothing better,"
said McMurdo.

"By Gar! you've got an Irish tongue in your head anyhow,"
cried the saloon-keeper, not quite certain whether to humour this
audacious visitor or to stand upon his dignity.

"So you are good enough to pass my appearance?"

"Sure," said McMurdo.

"And you were told to see me?"

"I was."

"And who told you?"

"Brother Scanlan of Lodge 341, Vermissa. I drink your health
Councillor, and to our better acquaintance." He raised a glass
with which he had been served to his lips and elevated his little
finger as he drank it.

McGinty, who had been watching him narrowly, raised his
thick black eyebrows. "Oh, it's like that, is it?" said he. "I'll
have to look a bit closer into this, Mister --"

"McMurdo."

"A bit closer, Mr. McMurdo; for we don't take folk on trust
in these parts, nor believe all we're told neither. Come in here
for a moment, behind the bar."

There was a small room there, lined with barrels. McGinty
carefully closed the door, and then seated himself on one of
them, biting thoughtfully on his cigar and surveying his companion
with those disquieting eyes. For a couple of minutes he sat in
complete silence. McMurdo bore the inspection cheerfully, one
hand in his coat pocket, the other twisting his brown moustache.
Suddenly McGinty stooped and produced a wicked-looking revolver.

"See here, my joker," said he, "if I thought you were
playing any game on us, it would be short work for you."

"This is a strange welcome," McMurdo answered with some
dignity, "for the Bodymaster of a lodge of Freemen to give to a
stranger brother."

"Ay, but it's just that same that you have to prove," said
McGinty, "and God help you if you fail! Where were you
made?"

"Lodge 29, Chicago."

"When?"

"June 24, 1872."

"What Bodymaster?"

"James H. Scott."

"Who is your district ruler?"

"Bartholomew Wilson."

"Hum! You seem glib enough in your tests. What are you
doing here?"

"Working, the same as you -- but a poorer job."

"You have your back answer quick enough."

"Yes, I was always quick of speech."

"Are you quick of action?"

"I have had that name among those that knew me best."

"Well, we may try you sooner than you think. Have you
heard anything of the lodge in these parts?"

"I've heard that it takes a man to be a brother."

"True for you, Mr. McMurdo. Why did you leave Chicago?"

"I'm damned if I tell you that!"

McGinty opened his eyes. He was not used to being answered
in such fashion, and it amused him. "Why won't you tell me?"

"Because no brother may tell another a lie."

"Then the truth is too bad to tell?"

"You can put it that way if you like."

"See here, mister, you can't expect me, as Bodymaster, to
pass into the lodge a man for whose past he can't answer."

McMurdo looked puzzled. Then he took a worn newspaper
cutting from an inner pocket.

"You wouldn't squeal on a fellow?" said he.

"I'll wipe my hand across your face if you say such words to
me!" cried McGinty hotly.

"You are right, Councillor," said McMurdo meekly. "I should
apologize. I spoke without thought. Well, I know that I am safe
in your hands. Look at that clipping."

McGinty glanced his eyes over the account of the shooting of
one Jonas Pinto, in the Lake Saloon, Market Street, Chicago, in
the New Year week of 1874.

"Your work?" he asked, as he handed back the paper.

McMurdo nodded.

"Why did you shoot him?"

"I was helping Uncle Sam to make dollars. Maybe mine were
not as good gold as his, but they looked as well and were cheaper
to make. This man Pinto helped me to shove the queer --"

"To do what?"

"Well, it means to pass the dollars out into circulation. Then
he said he would split. Maybe he did split. I didn't wait to see. I
just killed him and lighted out for the coal country."

"Why the coal country?"

"'Cause I'd read in the papers that they weren't too particular
in those parts."

McGinty laughed. "You were first a coiner and then a murderer,
and you came to these parts because you thought you'd be welcome."

"That's about the size of it," McMurdo answered.

"Well, I guess you'll go far. Say, can you make those dollars
yet?"

McMurdo took half a dozen from his pocket. "Those never
passed the Philadelphia mint," said he.

"You don't say!" McGinty held them to the light in his
enormous hand, which was hairy as a gorilla's. "I can see no
difference. Gar! you'll be a mighty useful brother, I'm thinking!
We can do with a bad man or two among us, Friend McMurdo:
for there are times when we have to take our own part. We'd
soon be against the wall if we didn't shove back at those that
were pushing us."

"Well, I guess I'll do my share of shoving with the rest of the
boys."

"You seem to have a good nerve. You didn't squirm when I
shoved this gun at you."

"It was not me that was in danger."

"Who then?"

"It was you, Councillor." McMurdo drew a cocked pistol
from the side pocket of his peajacket. "I was covering you all
the time. I guess my shot would have been as quick as yours."

"By Gar!" McGinty flushed an angry red and then burst into
a roar of laughter. "Say, we've had no such holy terror come to
hand this many a year. I reckon the lodge will learn to be proud
of you.... Well, what the hell do you want? And can't I speak
alone with a gentleman for five minutes but you must butt in on
us?"

The bartender stood abashed. "I'm sorry, Councillor, but it's
Ted Baldwin. He says he must see you this very minute."

The message was unnecessary; for the set, cruel face of the
man himself was looking over the servant's shoulder. He pushed
the bartender out and closed the door on him.

"So," said he with a furious glance at McMurdo, "you got
here first, did you? I've a word to say to you, Councillor, about
this man."

"Then say it here and now before my face," cried McMurdo.

"I'll say it at my own time, in my own way."

"Tut! Tut!" said McGinty, getting off his barrel. "This will
never do. We have a new brother here, Baldwin, and it's not for
us to greet him in such fashion. Hold out your hand, man, and
make it up!"

"Never!" cried Baldwin in a fury.

"I've offered to fight him if he thinks I have wronged him,"
said McMurdo. "I'll fight him with fists, or, if that won't satisfy
him, I'll fight him any other way he chooses. Now, I'll leave it
to you, Councillor, to judge between us as a Bodymaster should."

"What is it, then?"

"A young lady. She's free to choose for herself."

"Is she?" cried Baldwin.

"As between two brothers of the lodge I should say that she
was," said the Boss.

"Oh, that's your ruling, is it?"

"Yes, it is, Ted Baldwin," said McGinty, with a wicked
stare. "Is it you that would dispute it?"

"You would throw over one that has stood by you this five
years in favour of a man that you never saw before in your life?
You're not Bodymaster for life, Jack McGinty, and by God!
when next it comes to a vote --"

The Councillor sprang at him like a tiger. His hand closed
round the other's neck, and he hurled him back across one of the
barrels. In his mad fury he would have squeezed the life out of
him if McMurdo had not interfered.

"Easy, Councillor! For heaven's sake, go easy!" he cried, as
he dragged him back.

McGinty released his hold, and Baldwin, cowed and shaken
gasping for breath, and shivering in every limb, as one who has
looked over the very edge of death, sat up on the barrel over
which he had been hurled.

"You've been asking for it this many a day, Ted Baldwin --
now you've got it!" cried McGinty, his huge chest rising and
falling. "Maybe you think if I was voted down from Bodymaster
you would find yourself in my shoes. It's for the lodge to say
that. But so long as I am the chief I'll have no man lift his voice
against me or my rulings."

"I have nothing against you," mumbled Baldwin, feeling his
throat.

"Well, then," cried the other, relapsing in a moment into a
bluff joviality, "we are all good friends again and there's an end
of the matter."

He took a bottle of champagne down from the shelf and
twisted out the cork.

"See now," he continued, as he filled three high glasses.
"Let us drink the quarrelling toast of the lodge. After that, as
you know, there can be no bad blood between us. Now, then
the left hand on the apple of my throat. I say to you, Ted
Baldwin, what is the offense, sir?"

"The clouds are heavy," answered Baldwin

"But they will forever brighten."

"And this I swear!"

The men drank their glasses, and the same ceremony was
performed between Baldwin and McMurdo

"There!" cried McGinty, rubbing his hands. "That's the end
of the black blood. You come under lodge discipline if it goes
further, and that's a heavy hand in these parts, as Brother
Baldwin knows -- and as you will damn soon find out, Brother
McMurdo, if you ask for trouble!"

"Faith, I'd be slow to do that," said McMurdo. He held out
his hand to Baldwin. "I'm quick to quarrel and quick to forgive.
It's my hot Irish blood, they tell me. But it's over for me, and I
bear no grudge."

Baldwin had to take the proffered hand, for the baleful eye of
the terrible Boss was upon him. But his sullen face showed how
little the words of the other had moved him.

McGinty clapped them both on the shoulders. "Tut! These
girls! These girls!" he cried. "To think that the same petticoats
should come between two of my boys! It's the devil's own luck!
Well, it's the colleen inside of them that must settle the question
for it's outside the jurisdiction of a Bodymaster -- and the Lord
be praised for that! We have enough on us, without the women
as well. You'll have to be affiliated to Lodge 341, Brother
McMurdo. We have our own ways and methods, different from
Chicago. Saturday night is our meeting, and if you come then,
we'll make you free forever of the Vermissa Valley."



Chapter 3
Lodge 341, Vermissa

On the day following the evening which had contained so many
exciting events, McMurdo moved his lodgings from old Jacob
Shafter's and took up his quarters at the Widow MacNamara's
on the extreme outskirts of the town. Scanlan, his original
acquaintance aboard the train, had occasion shortly afterwards to
move into Vermissa, and the two lodged together. There was no
other boarder, and the hostess was an easy-going old Irishwoman
who left them to themselves; so that they had a freedom for
speech and action welcome to men who had secrets in common.

Shafter had relented to the extent of letting McMurdo come to
his meals there when he liked; so that his intercourse with Ettie
was by no means broken. On the contrary, it drew closer and
more intimate as the weeks went by.

In his bedroom at his new abode McMurdo felt it safe to take
out the coining moulds, and under many a pledge of secrecy a
number of brothers from the lodge were allowed to come in and
see them, each carrying away in his pocket some examples of the
false money, so cunningly struck that there was never the slightest
difficulty or danger in passing it. Why, with such a wonderful art
at his command, McMurdo should condescend to work at all was a
perpetual mystery to his companions; though he made it clear to
anyone who asked him that if he lived without any visible means it
would very quickly bring the police upon his track.

One policeman was indeed after him already; but the incident,
as luck would have it, did the adventurer a great deal more good
than harm. After the first introduction there were few evenings
when he did not find his way to McGinty's saloon, there to make
closer acquaintance with "the boys," which was the jovial title
by which the dangerous gang who infested the place were known
to one another. His dashing manner and fearlessness of speech
made him a favourite with them all; while the rapid and scientific
way in which he polished off his antagonist in an "all in"
bar-room scrap earned the respect of that rough community.
Another incident, however, raised him even higher in their
estimation.

Just at the crowded hour one night, the door opened and a man
entered with the quiet blue uniform and peaked cap of the mine
police. This was a special body raised by the railways and
colliery owners to supplement the efforts of the ordinary civil
police, who were perfectly helpless in the face of the organized
ruffianism which terrorized the district. There was a hush as he
entered, and many a curious glance was cast at him; but the
relations between policemen and criminals are peculiar in some
parts of the States, and McGinty himself standing behind his
counter, showed no surprise when the policeman enrolled himself
among his customers.

"A straight whisky, for the night is bitter," said the police
officer. "I don't think we have met before, Councillor?"

"You'll be the new captain?" said McGinty.

"That's so. We're looking to you, Councillor, and to the other
leading citizens, to help us in upholding law and order in this
township. Captain Marvin is my name."

"We'd do better without you, Captain Marvin," said McGinty
coldly; "for we have our own police of the township, and no
need for any imported goods. What are you but the paid tool of
the capitalists, hired by them to club or shoot your poorer fellow
citizen?"

"Well, well, we won't argue about that," said the police
officer good-humouredly. "I expect we all do our duty same as
we see it; but we can't all see it the same." He had drunk off his
glass and had turned to go, when his eyes fell upon the face of
Jack McMurdo, who was scowling at his elbow. "Hullo! Hullo!"
he cried, looking him up and down. "Here's an old acquaintance!"

McMurdo shrank away from him. "I was never a friend to
you nor any other cursed copper in my life," said he.

"An acquaintance isn't always a friend," said the police
captain, grinning. "You're Jack McMurdo of Chicago, right
enough, and don't you deny it!"

McMurdo shrugged his shoulders. "I'm not denying it," said
he. "D'ye think I'm ashamed of my own name?"

"You've got good cause to be, anyhow."

"What the devil d'you mean by that?" he roared with his fists
clenched.

"No, no, Jack, bluster won't do with me. I was an officer in
Chicago before ever I came to this darned coal bunker, and I
know a Chicago crook when I see one."

McMurdo's face fell. "Don't tell me that you're Marvin of the
Chicago Central!" he cried.

"Just the same old Teddy Marvin, at your service. We haven't
forgotten the shooting of Jonas Pinto up there."

"I never shot him."

"Did you not? That's good impartial evidence, ain't it? Well,
his death came in uncommon handy for you, or they would have
had you for shoving the queer. Well, we can let that be bygones;
for, between you and me -- and perhaps I'm going further than
my duty in saying it -- they could get no clear case against you,
and Chicago's open to you to-morrow."

"I'm very well where I am."

"Well, I've given you the pointer, and you're a sulky dog not
to thank me for it."

"Well, I suppose you mean well, and I do thank you," said
McMurdo in no very gracious manner.

"It's mum with me so long as I see you living on the
straight," said the captain. "But, by the Lord! if you get off
after this, it's another story! So good-night to you -- and
goodnight, Councillor."

He left the bar-room; but not before he had created a local
hero. McMurdo's deeds in far Chicago had been whispered
before. He had put off all questions with a smile, as one who did
not wish to have greatness thrust upon him. But now the thing
was officially confirmed. The bar loafers crowded round him and
shook him heartily by the hand. He was free of the community
from that time on. He could drink hard and show little trace of it;
but that evening, had his mate Scanlan not been at hand to lead
him home, the feted hero would surely have spent his night
under the bar.

On a Saturday night McMurdo was introduced to the lodge.
He had thought to pass in without ceremony as being an initiate
of Chicago; but there were particular rites in Vermissa of which
they were proud, and these had to be undergone by every
postulant. The assembly met in a large room reserved for such
purposes at the Union House. Some sixty members assembled at
Vermissa; but that by no means represented the full strength of
the organization, for there were several other lodges in the
valley, and others across the mountains on each side, who
exchanged members when any serious business was afoot, so that
a crime might be done by men who were strangers to the
locality. Altogether there were not less than five hundred
scattered over the coal district.

In the bare assembly room the men were gathered round a
long table. At the side was a second one laden with bottles and
glasses, on which some members of the company were already
turning their eyes. McGinty sat at the head with a flat black
velvet cap upon his shock of tangled black hair, and a coloured
purple stole round his neck, so that he seemed to be a priest
presiding over some diabolical ritual. To right and left of him
were the higher lodge officials, the cruel, handsome face of Ted
Baldwin among them. Each of these wore some scarf or medallion
as emblem of his office.

They were, for the most part, men of mature age; but the rest of
the company consisted of young fellows from eighteen to twenty-
five, the ready and capable agents who carried out the commands
of their seniors. Among the older men were many whose features
showed the tigerish, lawless souls within; but looking at the rank
and file it was difficult to believe that these eager and open-faced
young fellows were in very truth a dangerous gang of murderers,
whose minds had suffered such complete moral perversion that
they took a horrible pride in their proficiency at the business, and
looked with deepest respect at the man who had the reputation of
making what they called "a clean job."

To their contorted natures it had become a spirited and chivalrous
thing to volunteer for service against some man who had never
injured them, and whom in many cases they had never seen in their
lives. The crime committed, they quarrelled as to who had actually
struck the fatal blow, and amused one another and the company by
describing the cries and contortions of the murdered man.

At first they had shown some secrecy in their arrangements;
but at the time which this narrative describes their proceedings
were extraordinarily open, for the repeated failures of the law
had proved to them that, on the one hand, no one would dare to
witness against them, and on the other they had an unlimited
number of stanch witnesses upon whom they could call, and a
well-filled treasure chest from which they could draw the funds
to engage the best legal talent in the state. In ten long years of
outrage there had been no single conviction, and the only danger
that ever threatened the Scowrers lay in the victim himself --
who, however outnumbered and taken by surprise, might and
occasionally did leave his mark upon his assailants.

McMurdo had been warned that some ordeal lay before him;
but no one would tell him in what it consisted. He was led now
into an outer room by two solemn brothers. Through the plank
partition he could hear the murmur of many voices from the
assembly within. Once or twice he caught the sound of his own
name, and he knew that they were discussing his candidacy.
Then there entered an inner guard with a green and gold sash
across his chest.

"The Bodymaster orders that he shall be trussed, blinded, and
entered," said he.

The three of them removed his coat, turned up the sleeve of
his right arm, and finally passed a rope round above the elbows
and made it fast. They next placed a thick black cap right over
his head and the upper part of his face, so that he could see
nothing. He was then led into the assembly hall.

It was pitch dark and very oppressive under his hood. He
heard the rustle and murmur of the people round him, and then
the voice of McGinty sounded dull and distant through the
covering of his ears.

"John McMurdo," said the voice, "are you already a member
of the Ancient Order of Freemen?"

He bowed in assent.

"Is your lodge No. 29, Chicago?"

He bowed again.

"Dark nights are unpleasant," said the voice.

"Yes, for strangers to travel," he answered.

"The clouds are heavy."

"Yes, a storm is approaching."

"Are the brethren satisfied?" asked the Bodymaster.

There was a general murmur of assent.

"We know, Brother, by your sign and by your countersign
that you are indeed one of us," said McGinty. "We would have
you know, however, that in this county and in other counties of
these parts we have certain rites, and also certain duties of our
own which call for good men. Are you ready to be tested?"

"I am."

"Are you of stout heart?"

"I am."

"Take a stride forward to prove it."

As the words were said he felt two hard points in front of his
eyes, pressing upon them so that it appeared as if he could not
move forward without a danger of losing them. None the less, he
nerved himself to step resolutely out, and as he did so the
pressure melted away. There was a low murmur of applause.

"He is of stout heart," said the voice. "Can you bear pain?"

"As well as another," he answered.

"Test him!"

It was all he could do to keep himself from screaming out, for
an agonizing pain shot through his forearm. He nearly fainted at
the sudden shock of it; but he bit his lip and clenched his hands
to hide his agony.

"I can take more than that," said he.

This time there was loud applause. A finer first appearance
had never been made in the lodge. Hands clapped him on the
back, and the hood was plucked from his head. He stood blinking
and smiling amid the congratulations of the brothers.

"One last word, Brother McMurdo," said McGinty. "You
have already sworn the oath of secrecy and fidelity, and you are
aware that the punishment for any breach of it is instant and
inevitable death?"

"I am," said McMurdo.

"And you accept the rule of the Bodymaster for the time
being under all circumstances?"

"I do."

"Then in the name of Lodge 341, Vermissa, I welcome you to
its privileges and debates. You will put the liquor on the table,
Brother Scanlan, and we will drink to our worthy brother."

McMurdo's coat had been brought to him; but before putting it
on he examined his right arm, which still smarted heavily. There
on the flesh of the forearm was a circle with a triangle within it,
deep and red, as the branding iron had left it. One or two of his
neighbours pulled up their sleeves and showed their own lodge
marks.

"We've all had it," said one; "but not all as brave as you
over it."

"Tut! It was nothing," said he; but it burned and ached all the
same.

When the drinks which followed the ceremony of initiation
had all been disposed of, the business of the lodge proceeded.
McMurdo, accustomed only to the prosaic performances of Chicago,
listened with open ears and more surprise than he ventured to
show to what followed.

"The first business on the agenda paper," said McGinty, "is
to read the following letter from Division Master Windle of
Merton County Lodge 249. He says:

     "DEAR SIR:

       "There is a job to be done on Andrew Rae of Rae &

     Sturmash, coal owners near this place. You will remember

     that your lodge owes us a return, having had the service of

     two brethren in the matter of the patrolman last fall. You

     will send two good men, they will be taken charge of by

     Treasurer Higgins of this lodge, whose address you know.

     He will show them when to act and where. Yours in freedom,

                                   "J. W. WINDLE D. M. A. O. F.

"Windle has never refused us when we have had occasion to
ask for the loan of a man or two, and it is not for us to refuse
him." McGinty paused and looked round the room with his dull,
malevolent eyes. "Who will volunteer for the job?"

Several young fellows held up their hands. The Bodymaster
looked at them with an approving smile.

"You'll do, Tiger Cormac. If you handle it as well as you did
the last, you won't be wrong. And you, Wilson."

"I've no pistol," said the volunteer, a mere boy in his teens.

"It's your first, is it not? Well, you have to be blooded some
time. It will be a great start for you. As to the pistol, you'll find
it waiting for you, or I'm mistaken. If you report yourselves on
Monday, it will be time enough. You'll get a great welcome
when you return."

"Any reward this time?" asked Cormac, a thick-set, dark-
faced, brutal-looking young man, whose ferocity had earned him
the nickname of "Tiger."

"Never mind the reward. You just do it for the honour of the
thing. Maybe when it is done there will be a few odd dollars at
the bottom of the box."

"What has the man done?" asked young Wilson.

"Sure, it's not for the likes of you to ask what the man has
done. He has been judged over there. That's no business of ours.
All we have to do is to carry it out for them, same as they would
for us. Speaking of that, two brothers from the Merton lodge are
coming over to us next week to do some business in this quarter."

"Who are they?" asked someone.

"Faith, it is wiser not to ask. If you know nothing, you can
testify nothing, and no trouble can come of it. But they are men
who will make a clean job when they are about it."

"And time, too!" cried Ted Baldwin. "Folk are gettin' out of
hand in these parts. It was only last week that three of our men
were turned off by Foreman Blaker. It's been owing him a long
time, and he'll get it full and proper."

"Get what?" McMurdo whispered to his neighbour.

"The business end of a buckshot cartridge!" cried the man
with a loud laugh. "What think you of our ways, Brother?"

McMurdo's criminal soul seemed to have already absorbed the
spirit of the vile association of which he was now a member. "I
like it well," said he. "'Tis a proper place for a lad of mettle."

Several of those who sat around heard his words and applauded
them.

"What's that?" cried the black-maned Bodymaster from the
end of the table.

"'Tis our new brother, sir, who finds our ways to his taste."

McMurdo rose to his feet for an instant. "I would say,
Eminent Bodymaster, that if a man should be wanted I should
take it as an honour to be chosen to help the lodge."

There was great applause at this. It was felt that a new sun
was pushing its rim above the horizon. To some of the elders it
seemed that the progress was a little too rapid.

"I would move," said the secretary, Harraway, a vulture-
faced old graybeard who sat near the chairman, "that Brother
McMurdo should wait until it is the good pleasure of the lodge to
employ him."

"Sure, that was what I meant; I'm in your hands," said
McMurdo.

"Your time will come, Brother," said the chairman. "We
have marked you down as a willing man, and we believe that
you will do good work in these parts. There is a small matter
to-night in which you may take a hand if it so please you."

"I will wait for something that is worth while."

"You can come to-night, anyhow, and it will help you to know what
we stand for in this community. I will make the announcement later.
Meanwhile," he glanced at his agenda paper, "I have one or two more
points to bring before the meeting. First of all, I will ask the
treasurer as to our bank balance. There is the pension to Jim
Carnaway's widow. He was struck down doing the work of the lodge,
and it is for us to see that she is not the loser."

"Jim was shot last month when they tried to kill Chester
Wilcox of Marley Creek," McMurdo's neighbour informed him.

"The funds are good at the moment," said the treasurer, with
the bankbook in front of him. "The firms have been generous of
late. Max Linder & Co. paid five hundred to be left alone.
Walker Brothers sent in a hundred; but I took it on myself to
return it and ask for five. If I do not hear by Wednesday, their
winding gear may get out of order. We had to burn their breaker
last year before they became reasonable. Then the West Section
Coaling Company has paid its annual contribution. We have
enough on hand to meet any obligations."

"What about Archie Swindon?" asked a brother.

"He has sold out and left the district. The old devil left a note
for us to say that he had rather be a free crossing sweeper in New
York than a large mine owner under the power of a ring of blackmailers.
By Gar! it was as well that he made a break for it before the note
reached us! I guess he won't show his face in this valley again."

An elderly, clean-shaved man with a kindly face and a good
brow rose from the end of the table which faced the chairman.
"Mr. Treasurer," he asked, "may I ask who has bought the
property of this man that we have driven out of the district?"

"Yes, Brother Morris. It has been bought by the State & Merton
County Railroad Company."

"And who bought the mines of Todman and of Lee that came
into the market in the same way last year?"

"The same company, Brother Morris."

"And who bought the ironworks of Manson and of Shuman and of
Van Deher and of Atwood, which have all been given up of late?"

"They were all bought by the West Gilmerton General Mining Company."

"I don't see, Brother Morris," said the chairman, "that it matters to
us who buys them, since they can't carry them out of the district."

"With all respect to you, Eminent Bodymaster, I think it may
matter very much to us. This process has been going on now for
ten long years. We are gradually driving all the small men out of
trade. What is the result? We find in their places great companies
like the Railroad or the General Iron, who have their directors in
New York or Philadelphia, and care nothing for our threats. We
can take it out of their local bosses, but it only means that others
will be sent in their stead. And we are making it dangerous for
ourselves. The small men could not harm us. They had not the money
nor the power. So long as we did not squeeze them too dry, they
would stay on under our power. But if these big companies find
that we stand between them and their profits, they will spare
no pains and no expense to hunt us down and bring us to court."

There was a hush at these ominous words, and every face darkened
as gloomy looks were exchanged. So omnipotent and unchallenged
had they been that the very thought that there was possible
retribution in the background had been banished from their minds.
And yet the idea struck a chill to the most reckless of them.

"It is my advice," the speaker continued, "that we go easier
upon the small men. On the day that they have all been driven
out the power of this society will have been broken."

Unwelcome truths are not popular. There were angry cries as the
speaker resumed his seat. McGinty rose with gloom upon his brow.

"Brother Morris," said he, "you were always a croaker. So
long as the members of this lodge stand together there is no
power in the United States that can touch them. Sure, have we
not tried it often enough in the law courts? I expect the big
companies will find it easier to pay than to fight, same as the
little companies do. And now, Brethren," McGinty took off his
black velvet cap and his stole as he spoke, "this lodge has
finished its business for the evening, save for one small matter
which may be mentioned when we are parting. The time has now
come for fraternal refreshment and for harmony."

Strange indeed is human nature. Here were these men, to
whom murder was familiar, who again and again had struck
down the father of the family, some man against whom they had
no personal feeling, without one thought of compunction or of
compassion for his weeping wife or helpless children, and yet
the tender or pathetic in music could move them to tears. McMurdo
had a fine tenor voice, and if he had failed to gain the good
will of the lodge before, it could no longer have been withheld
after he had thrilled them with "I'm Sitting on the Stile, Mary,"
and "On the Banks of Allan Water."

In his very first night the new recruit had made himself one of
the most popular of the brethren, marked already for advancement
and high office. There were other qualities needed, however,
besides those of good fellowship, to make a worthy Freeman,
and of these he was given an example before the evening was
over. The whisky bottle had passed round many times, and the
men were flushed and ripe for mischief when their Bodymaster
rose once more to address them.

"Boys," said he, "there's one man in this town that wants
trimming up, and it's for you to see that he gets it. I'm speaking
of James Stanger of the Herald. You've seen how he's been
opening his mouth against us again?"

There was a murmur of assent, with many a muttered oath.
McGinty took a slip of paper from his waistcoat pocket.

                     "LAW AND ORDER!

That's how he heads it.

       "REIGN OF TERROR IN THE COAL AND IRON DISTRICT

     "Twelve years have now elapsed since the first assassinations

   which proved the existence of a criminal organization in our

   midst. From that day these outrages have never ceased, until

   now they have reached a pitch which makes us the opprobrium

   of the civilized world. Is it for such results as this that

   our great country welcomes to its bosom the alien who flies

   from the despotisms of Europe? Is it that they shall

   themselves become tyrants over the very men who have given

   them shelter, and that a state of terrorism and lawlessness

   should be established under the very shadow of the sacred

   folds of the starry Flag of Freedom which would raise horror

   in our minds if we read of it as existing under the most

   effete monarchy of the East? The men are known. The organization

   is patent and public. How long are we to endure it? Can we

   forever live --

Sure, I've read enough of the slush!" cried the chairman,
tossing the paper down upon the table. "That's what he says of us.
The question I'm asking you is what shall we say to him?"

"Kill him!" cried a dozen fierce voices.

"I protest against that," said Brother Morris, the man of the
good brow and shaved face. "I tell you, Brethren, that our hand
is too heavy in this valley, and that there will come a point
where in self-defense every man will unite to crush us out. James
Stanger is an old man. He is respected in the township and the
district. His paper stands for all that is solid in the valley.
If that man is struck down, there will be a stir through this
state that will only end with our destruction."

"And how would they bring about our destruction, Mr. Standback?"
cried McGinty. "Is it by the police? Sure, half of them are in our
pay and half of them afraid of us. Or is it by the law courts and
the judge? Haven't we tried that before now, and what ever came of it?"

"There is a Judge Lynch that might try the case," said Brother Morris.

A general shout of anger greeted the suggestion.

"I have but to raise my finger," cried McGinty, "and I could
put two hundred men into this town that would clear it out from
end to end." Then suddenly raising his voice and bending his
huge black brows into a terrible frown, "See here, Brother
Morris, I have my eye on you, and have had for some time!
You've no heart yourself, and you try to take the heart out of
others. It will be an ill day for you, Brother Morris, when your
own name comes on our agenda paper, and I'm thinking that it's
just there that I ought to place it."

Morris had turned deadly pale, and his knees seemed to give
way under him as he fell back into his chair. He raised his glass
in his trembling hand and drank before he could answer. "I
apologize, Eminent Bodymaster, to you and to every brother in
this lodge if I have said more than I should. I am a faithful
member -- you all know that -- and it is my fear lest evil come to
the lodge which makes me speak in anxious words. But I have
greater trust in your judgment than in my own, Eminent
Bodymaster, and I promise you that I will not offend again."

The Bodymaster's scowl relaxed as he listened to the humble words.
"Very good, Brother Morris. It's myself that would be sorry if it
were needful to give you a lesson. But so long as I am in this
chair we shall be a united lodge in word and in deed. And now, boys,"
he continued, looking round at the company, "I'll say this much, that
if Stanger got his full deserts there would be more trouble than we
need ask for. These editors hang together, and every journal in the
state would be crying out for police and troops. But I guess you can
give him a pretty severe warning. Will you fix it, Brother Baldwin?"

"Sure!" said the young man eagerly.

"How many will you take?"

"Half a dozen, and two to guard the door. You'll come, Gower,
and you, Mansel, and you, Scanlan, and the two Willabys."

"I promised the new brother he should go," said the chairman.

Ted Baldwin looked at McMurdo with eyes which showed that
he had not forgotten nor forgiven. "Well, he can come if he
wants," he said in a surly voice. "That's enough. The sooner
we get to work the better."

The company broke up with shouts and yells and snatches of
drunken song. The bar was still crowded with revellers, and
many of the brethren remained there. The little band who had
been told off for duty passed out into the street, proceeding in
twos and threes along the sidewalk so as not to provoke attention.
It was a bitterly cold night, with a half-moon shining brilliantly
in a frosty, star-spangled sky. The men stopped and gathered in a
yard which faced a high building. The words "Vermissa Herald" were
printed in gold lettering between the brightly lit windows. From
within came the clanking of the printing press.

"Here, you," said Baldwin to McMurdo, "you can stand
below at the door and see that the road is kept open for us.
Arthur Willaby can stay with you. You others come with me.
Have no fears, boys; for we have a dozen witnesses that we are
in the Union Bar at this very moment."

It was nearly midnight, and the street was deserted save for
one or two revellers upon their way home. The party crossed the
road, and, pushing open the door of the newspaper office,
Baldwin and his men rushed in and up the stair which faced
them. McMurdo and another remained below. From the room
above came a shout, a cry for help, and then the sound of
trampling feet and of falling chairs. An instant later a gray-haired
man rushed out on the landing.

He was seized before he could get farther, and his spectacles
came tinkling down to McMurdo's feet. There was a thud and a
groan. He was on his face, and half a dozen sticks were clattering
together as they fell upon him. He writhed, and his long, thin
limbs quivered under the blows. The others ceased at last; but
Baldwin, his cruel face set in an infernal smile, was hacking at
the man's head, which he vainly endeavoured to defend with his
arms. His white hair was dabbled with patches of blood. Baldwin
was still stooping over his victim, putting in a short, vicious
blow whenever he could see a part exposed, when McMurdo dashed
up the stair and pushed him back.

"You'll kill the man," said he. "Drop it!"

Baldwin looked at him in amazement. "Curse you!" he cried.
"Who are you to interfere -- you that are new to the lodge? Stand
back!" He raised his stick; but McMurdo had whipped his pistol
out of his hip pocket.

"Stand back yourself!" he cried. "I'll blow your face in if
you lay a hand on me. As to the lodge, wasn't it the order of the
Bodymaster that the man was not to be killed -- and what are you
doing but killing him?"

"It's truth he says," remarked one of the men.

"By Gar! you'd best hurry yourselves!" cried the man below.
"The windows are all lighting up, and you'll have the whole
town here inside of five minutes."

There was indeed the sound of shouting in the street, and a
little group of compositors and pressmen was forming in the hall
below and nerving itself to action. Leaving the limp and motionless
body of the editor at the head of the stair, the criminals rushed
down and made their way swiftly along the street. Having reached
the Union House, some of them mixed with the crowd in McGinty's
saloon, whispering across the bar to the Boss that the job had
been well carried through. Others, and among them McMurdo, broke
away into side streets, and so by devious paths to their own homes.



Chapter 4
The Valley of Fear

When McMurdo awoke next morning he had good reason to
remember his initiation into the lodge. His head ached with the
effect of the drink, and his arm, where he had been branded, was
hot and swollen. Having his own peculiar source of income, he
was irregular in his attendance at his work; so he had a late
breakfast, and remained at home for the morning writing a long
letter to a friend. Afterwards he read the Daily Herald. In a
special column put in at the last moment he read:

        OUTRAGE AT THE HERALD OFFICE -- EDITOR

                   SERIOUSLY INJURED.

It was a short account of the facts with which he was himself more
familiar than the writer could have been. It ended with the statement:

      The matter is now in the hands of the police; but it can

    hardly be hoped that their exertions will be attended by any

    better results than in the past. Some of the men were

    recognized, and there is hope that a conviction may be

    obtained. The source of the outrage was, it need hardly be

    said, that infamous society which has held this community

    in bondage for so long a period, and against which the

    Herald has taken so uncompromising a stand. Mr. Stanger's

    many friends will rejoice to hear that, though he has been

    cruelly and brutally beaten, and though he has sustained

    severe injuries about the head, there is no immediate danger

    to his life.

Below it stated that a guard of police, armed with Winchester
rifles, had been requisitioned for the defense of the office.

McMurdo had laid down the paper, and was lighting his pipe with
a hand which was shaky from the excesses of the previous evening,
when there was a knock outside, and his landlady brought to him
a note which had just been handed in by a lad. It was unsigned,
and ran thus:

    I should wish to speak to you, but would rather not do so

    in your house. You will find me beside the flagstaff upon

    Miller Hill. If you will come there now, I have something

    which it is important for you to hear and for me to say.

McMurdo read the note twice with the utmost surprise; for he
could not imagine what it meant or who was the author of it.
Had it been in a feminine hand, he might have imagined that it
was the beginning of one of those adventures which had been
familiar enough in his past life. But it was the writing of a man,
and of a well educated one, too. Finally, after some hesitation,
he determined to see the matter through.

Miller Hill is an ill-kept public park in the very centre of the
town. In summer it is a favourite resort of the people; but in
winter it is desolate enough. From the top of it one has a view
not only of the whole straggling, grimy town, but of the winding
valley beneath, with its scattered mines and factories blackening
the snow on each side of it, and of the wooded and white-capped
ranges flanking it.

McMurdo strolled up the winding path hedged in with evergreens
until he reached the deserted restaurant which forms the centre
of summer gaiety. Beside it was a bare flagstaff, and underneath
it a man, his hat drawn down and the collar of his overcoat
turned up. When he turned his face McMurdo saw that it was Brother
Morris, he who had incurred the anger of the Bodymaster the night
before. The lodge sign was given and exchanged as they met.

"I wanted to have a word with you, Mr. McMurdo," said the
older man, speaking with a hesitation which showed that he was
on delicate ground. "It was kind of you to come."

"Why did you not put your name to the note?"

"One has to be cautious, mister. One never knows in times
like these how a thing may come back to one. One never knows
either who to trust or who not to trust."

"Surely one may trust brothers of the lodge."

"No, no, not always," cried Morris with vehemence. "Whatever
we say, even what we think, seems to go back to that man McGinty."

"Look here!" said McMurdo sternly. "It was only last night,
as you know well, that I swore good faith to our Bodymaster.
Would you be asking me to break my oath?"

"If that is the view you take," said Morris sadly, "I can only
say that I am sorry I gave you the trouble to come and meet me.
Things have come to a bad pass when two free citizens cannot
speak their thoughts to each other."

McMurdo, who had been watching his companion very narrowly,
relaxed somewhat in his bearing. "Sure I spoke for myself
only," said he. "I am a newcomer, as you know, and I am
strange to it all. It is not for me to open my mouth, Mr.
Morris, and if you think well to say anything to me I am
here to hear it."

"And to take it back to Boss McGinty!" said Morris bitterly.

"Indeed, then, you do me injustice there," cried McMurdo.
"For myself I am loyal to the lodge, and so I tell you straight;
but I would be a poor creature if I were to repeat to any other
what you might say to me in confidence. It will go no further
than me; though I warn you that you may get neither help nor
sympathy."

"I have given up looking for either the one or the other," said
Morris. "I may be putting my very life in your hands by what I
say; but, bad as you are -- and it seemed to me last night that you
were shaping to be as bad as the worst -- still you are new to it,
and your conscience cannot yet be as hardened as theirs. That
was why I thought to speak with you."

"Well, what have you to say?"

"If you give me away, may a curse be on you!"

"Sure, I said I would not."

"I would ask you, then, when you joined the Freeman's society
in Chicago and swore vows of charity and fidelity, did ever it
cross your mind that you might find it would lead you to crime?"

"If you call it crime," McMurdo answered.

"Call it crime!" cried Morris, his voice vibrating with passion.
"You have seen little of it if you can call it anything else. Was
it crime last night when a man old enough to be your father was
beaten till the blood dripped from his white hairs? Was that crime --
or what else would you call it?"

"There are some would say it was war," said McMurdo, "a war of
two classes with all in, so that each struck as best it could."

"Well, did you think of such a thing when you joined the
Freeman's society at Chicago?"

"No, I'm bound to say I did not."

"Nor did I when I joined it at Philadelphia. It was just a
benefit club and a meeting place for one's fellows. Then I heard
of this place -- curse the hour that the name first fell upon my
ears! -- and I came to better myself! My God! to better myself!
My wife and three children came with me. I started a dry goods
store on Market Square, and I prospered well. The word had
gone round that I was a Freeman, and I was forced to join the
local lodge, same as you did last night. I've the badge of shame
on my forearm and something worse branded on my heart. I
found that I was under the orders of a black villain and caught in
a meshwork of crime. What could I do? Every word I said to
make things better was taken as treason, same as it was last
night. I can't get away; for all I have in the world is in my store.
If I leave the society, I know well that it means murder to me,
and God knows what to my wife and children. Oh, man, it is
awful -- awful!" He put his hands to his face, and his body shook
with convulsive sobs.

McMurdo shrugged his shoulders. "You were too soft for the job,"
said he. "You are the wrong sort for such work."

"I had a conscience and a religion; but they made me a
criminal among them. I was chosen for a job. If I backed down
I knew well what would come to me. Maybe I'm a coward.
Maybe it's the thought of my poor little woman and the children
that makes me one. Anyhow I went. I guess it will haunt me forever.

"It was a lonely house, twenty miles from here, over the
range yonder. I was told off for the door, same as you were last
night. They could not trust me with the job. The others went in.
When they came out their hands were crimson to the wrists. As
we turned away a child was screaming out of the house behind
us. It was a boy of five who had seen his father murdered. I
nearly fainted with the horror of it, and yet I had to keep a bold
and smiling face; for well I knew that if I did not it would be out
of my house that they would come next with their bloody hands and it
would be my little Fred that would be screaming for his father.

"But I was a criminal then, part sharer in a murder, lost
forever in this world, and lost also in the next. I am a good
Catholic; but the priest would have no word with me when he
heard I was a Scowrer, and I am excommunicated from my faith.
That's how it stands with me. And I see you going down the same
road, and I ask you what the end is to be. Are you ready to be
a cold-blooded murderer also, or can we do anything to stop it?"

"What would you do?" asked McMurdo abruptly. "You would not inform?"

"God forbid!" cried Morris. "Sure, the very thought would
cost me my life."

"That's well," said McMurdo. "I'm thinking that you are a
weak man and that you make too much of the matter."

"Too much! Wait till you have lived here longer. Look down the valley!
See the cloud of a hundred chimneys that overshadows it! I tell you
that the cloud of murder hangs thicker and lower than that over the
heads of the people. It is the Valley of Fear, the Valley of Death.
The terror is in the hearts of the people from the dusk to the dawn.
Wait, young man, and you will learn for yourself."

"Well, I'll let you know what I think when I have seen more,"
said McMurdo carelessly. "What is very clear is that you are
not the man for the place, and that the sooner you sell out --
if you only get a dime a dollar for what the business is worth --
the better it will be for you. What you have said is safe with me;
but, by Gar! if I thought you were an informer --"

"No, no!" cried Morris piteously.

"Well, let it rest at that. I'll bear what you have said in mind,
and maybe some day I'll come back to it. I expect you meant
kindly by speaking to me like this. Now I'll be getting home."

"One word before you go," said Morris. "We may have been seen
together. They may want to know what we have spoken about."

"Ah! that's well thought of."

"I offer you a clerkship in my store."

"And I refuse it. That's our business. Well, so long, Brother Morris,
and may you find things go better with you in the future."

That same afternoon, as McMurdo sat smoking, lost in thought
beside the stove of his sitting-room, the door swung open and its
framework was filled with the huge figure of Boss McGinty. He
passed the sign, and then seating himself opposite to the young
man he looked at him steadily for some time, a look which was
as steadily returned.

"I'm not much of a visitor, Brother McMurdo," he said at last.
"I guess I am too busy over the folk that visit me. But I thought
I'd stretch a point and drop down to see you in your own house."

"I'm proud to see you here, Councillor," McMurdo answered heartily,
bringing his whisky bottle out of the cupboard. "It's an honour
that I had not expected."

"How's the arm?" asked the Boss.

McMurdo made a wry face. "Well, I'm not forgetting it," he said;
"but it's worth it."

"Yes, it's worth it," the other answered, "to those that are loyal
and go through with it and are a help to the lodge. What were you
speaking to Brother Morris about on Miller Hill this morning?"

The question came so suddenly that it was well that he had his
answer prepared. He burst into a hearty laugh. "Morris didn't
know I could earn a living here at home. He shan't know either;
for he has got too much conscience for the likes of me. But he's
a good-hearted old chap. It was his idea that I was at a loose
end, and that he would do me a good turn by offering me a
clerkship in a dry goods store."

"Oh, that was it?"

"Yes, that was it."

"And you refused it?"

"Sure. Couldn't I earn ten times as much in my own bedroom
with four hours' work?"

"That's so. But I wouldn't get about too much with Morris."

"Why not?"

"Well, I guess because I tell you not. That's enough for most
folk in these parts."

"It may be enough for most folk; but it ain't enough for me,
Councillor," said McMurdo boldly. "If you are a judge of men,
you'll know that."

The swarthy giant glared at him, and his hairy paw closed for an
instant round the glass as though he would hurl it at the head
of his companion. Then he laughed in his loud, boisterous,
insincere fashion.

"You're a queer card, for sure," said he. "Well, if you want reasons,
I'll give them. Did Morris say nothing to you against the lodge?"

"No."

"Nor against me?"

"No."

"Well, that's because he daren't trust you. But in his heart he
is not a loyal brother. We know that well. So we watch him and
we wait for the time to admonish him. I'm thinking that the time
is drawing near. There's no room for scabby sheep in our pen.
But if you keep company with a disloyal man, we might think
that you were disloyal, too. See?"

"There's no chance of my keeping company with him; for I
dislike the man," McMurdo answered. "As to being disloyal, if
it was any man but you he would not use the word to me twice."

"Well, that's enough," said McGinty, draining off his glass.
"I came down to give you a word in season, and you've had it."

"I'd like to know," said McMurdo, "how you ever came to
learn that I had spoken with Morris at all?"

McGinty laughed. "It's my business to know what goes on in
this township," said he. "I guess you'd best reckon on my
hearing all that passes. Well, time's up, and I'll just say --"

But his leavetaking was cut short in a very unexpected fashion.
With a sudden crash the door flew open, and three frowning,
intent faces glared in at them from under the peaks of police
caps. McMurdo sprang to his feet and half drew his revolver; but
his arm stopped midway as he became conscious that two
Winchester rifles were levelled at his head. A man in uniform
advanced into the room, a six-shooter in his hand. It was Captain
Marvin, once of Chicago, and now of the Mine Constabulary.
He shook his head with a half-smile at McMurdo.

"I thought you'd be getting into trouble, Mr. Crooked
McMurdo of Chicago," said he. "Can't keep out of it, can you?
Take your hat and come along with us."

"I guess you'll pay for this, Captain Marvin," said McGinty.
"Who are you, I'd like to know, to break into a house in this
fashion and molest honest, law-abiding men?"

"You're standing out in this deal, Councillor McGinty," said
the police captain. "We are not out after you, but after this man
McMurdo. It is for you to help, not to hinder us in our duty,"

"He is a friend of mine, and I'll answer for his conduct," said
the Boss.

"By all accounts, Mr. McGinty, you may have to answer for
your own conduct some of these days," the captain answered.
"This man McMurdo was a crook before ever he came here, and
he's a crook still. Cover him, Patrolman, while I disarm him."

"There's my pistol," said McMurdo coolly. "Maybe, Captain
Marvin, if you and I were alone and face to face you would not
take me so easily."

"Where's your warrant?" asked McGinty. "By Gar! a man
might as well live in Russia as in Vermissa while folk like you
are running the police. It's a capitalist outrage, and you'll hear
more of it, I reckon."

"You do what you think is your duty the best way you can,
Councillor. We'll look after ours."

"What am I accused of?" asked McMurdo.

"Of being concerned in the beating of old Editor Stanger at
the Herald office. It wasn't your fault that it isn't a murder
charge."

"Well, if that's all you have against him," cried McGinty
with a laugh, "you can save yourself a deal of trouble by
dropping it right now. This man was with me in my saloon
playing poker up to midnight, and I can bring a dozen to prove
it."

"That's your affair, and I guess you can settle it in court
to-morrow. Meanwhile, come on, McMurdo, and come quietly
if you don't want a gun across your head. You stand wide,
Mr. McGinty; for I warn you I will stand no resistance when
I am on duty!"

So determined was the appearance of the captain that both
McMurdo and his boss were forced to accept the situation. The
latter managed to have a few whispered words with the prisoner
before they parted.

"What about --" he jerked his thumb upward to signify the
coining plant.

"All right," whispered McMurdo, who had devised a safe
hiding place under the floor.

"I'll bid you good-bye," said the Boss, shaking hands. "I'll
see Reilly the lawyer and take the defense upon myself. Take my
word for it that they won't be able to hold you."

"I wouldn't bet on that. Guard the prisoner, you two, and shoot
him if he tries any games. I'll search the house before I leave."

He did so; but apparently found no trace of the concealed
plant. When he had descended he and his men escorted McMurdo
to headquarters. Darkness had fallen, and a keen blizzard
was blowing so that the streets were nearly deserted; but a few
loiterers followed the group, and emboldened by invisibility
shouted imprecations at the prisoner.

"Lynch the cursed Scowrer!" they cried. "Lynch him!" They
laughed and jeered as he was pushed into the police station.
After a short, formal examination from the inspector in charge he
was put into the common cell. Here he found Baldwin and three
other criminals of the night before, all arrested that afternoon and
waiting their trial next morning.

But even within this inner fortress of the law the long arm of
the Freemen was able to extend. Late at night there came a jailer
with a straw bundle for their bedding, out of which he extracted
two bottles of whisky, some glasses, and a pack of cards. They
spent a hilarious night, without an anxious thought as to the
ordeal of the morning.

Nor had they cause, as the result was to show. The magistrate
could not possibly, on the evidence, have held them for a higher
court. On the one hand the compositors and pressmen were forced
to admit that the light was uncertain, that they were themselves
much perturbed, and that it was difficult for them to swear to the
identity of the assailants; although they believed that the accused
were among them. Cross examined by the clever attorney who
had been engaged by McGinty, they were even more nebulous in
their evidence.

The injured man had already deposed that he was so taken by
surprise by the suddenness of the attack that he could state
nothing beyond the fact that the first man who struck him wore a
moustache. He added that he knew them to be Scowrers, since
no one else in the community could possibly have any enmity to
him, and he had long been threatened on account of his outspoken
editorials. On the other hand, it was clearly shown by the
united and unfaltering evidence of six citizens, including that
high municipal official, Councillor McGinty, that the men had
been at a card party at the Union House until an hour very much
later than the commission of the outrage.

Needless to say that they were discharged with something very
near to an apology from the bench for the inconvenience to
which they had been put, together with an implied censure of
Captain Marvin and the police for their officious zeal.

The verdict was greeted with loud applause by a court in
which McMurdo saw many familiar faces. Brothers of the lodge
smiled and waved. But there were others who sat with compressed
lips and brooding eyes as the men filed out of the dock. One of
them, a little, dark-bearded, resolute fellow, put the thoughts
of himself and comrades into words as the ex-prisoners passed him.

"You damned murderers!" he said. "We'll fix you yet!"



Chapter 5
The Darkest Hour

If anything had been needed to give an impetus to Jack McMurdo's
popularity among his fellows it would have been his arrest and
acquittal. That a man on the very night of joining the lodge should
have done something which brought him before the magistrate was a
new record in the annals of the society. Already he had earned
the reputation of a good boon companion, a cheery reveller, and
withal a man of high temper, who would not take an insult even
from the all-powerful Boss himself. But in addition to this he
impressed his comrades with the idea that among them all there
was not one whose brain was so ready to devise a bloodthirsty
scheme, or whose hand would be more capable of carrying it out.
"He'll be the boy for the clean job," said the oldsters to one
another, and waited their time until they could set him to his work.

McGinty had instruments enough already; but he recognized
that this was a supremely able one. He felt like a man holding a
fierce bloodhound in leash. There were curs to do the smaller
work; but some day he would slip this creature upon its prey. A
few members of the lodge, Ted Baldwin among them, resented
the rapid rise of the stranger and hated him for it; but they kept
clear of him, for he was as ready to fight as to laugh.

But if he gained favour with his fellows, there was another
quarter, one which had become even more vital to him, in which
he lost it. Ettie Shafter's father would have nothing more to do
with him, nor would he allow him to enter the house. Ettie
herself was too deeply in love to give him up altogether, and yet
her own good sense warned her of what would come from a
marriage with a man who was regarded as a criminal.

One morning after a sleepless night she determined to see him,
possibly for the last time, and make one strong endeavour to
draw him from those evil influences which were sucking him
down. She went to his house, as he had often begged her to do,
and made her way into the room which he used as his sitting-
room. He was seated at a table, with his back turned and a letter
in front of him. A sudden spirit of girlish mischief came over
her -- she was still only nineteen. He had not heard her when she
pushed open the door. Now she tiptoed forward and laid her
hand lightly upon his bended shoulders.

If she had expected to startle him, she certainly succeeded; but
only in turn to be startled herself. With a tiger spring he turned
on her, and his right hand was feeling for her throat. At the same
instant with the other hand he crumpled up the paper that lay before him.
For an instant he stood glaring. Then astonishment and joy took the
place of the ferocity which had convulsed his features -- a ferocity
which had sent her shrinking back in horror as from something which
had never before intruded into her gentle life.

"It's you!" said he, mopping his brow. "And to think that
you should come to me, heart of my heart, and I should find
nothing better to do than to want to strangle you! Come then,
darling," and he held out his arms, "let me make it up to you."

But she had not recovered from that sudden glimpse of guilty
fear which she had read in the man's face. All her woman's
instinct told her that it was not the mere fright of a man who is
startled. Guilt -- that was it -- guilt and fear!

"What's come over you, Jack?" she cried. "Why were you
so scared of me? Oh, Jack, if your conscience was at ease, you
would not have looked at me like that!"

"Sure, I was thinking of other things, and when you came
tripping so lightly on those fairy feet of yours --"

"No, no, it was more than that, Jack." Then a sudden
suspicion seized her. "Let me see that letter you were writing."

"Ah, Ettie, I couldn't do that."

Her suspicions became certainties. "It's to another woman,"
she cried. "I know it! Why else should you hold it from me?
Was it to your wife that you were writing? How am I to know
that you are not a married man -- you, a stranger, that nobody
knows?"

"I am not married, Ettie. See now, I swear it! You're the only
one woman on earth to me. By the cross of Christ I swear it!"

He was so white with passionate earnestness that she could not
but believe him.

"Well, then," she cried, "why will you not show me the letter?"

"I'll tell you, acushla," said he. "I'm under oath not to show
it, and just as I wouldn't break my word to you so I would keep
it to those who hold my promise. It's the business of the lodge,
and even to you it's secret. And if I was scared when a hand fell
on me, can't you understand it when it might have been the hand
of a detective?"

She felt that he was telling the truth. He gathered her into his
arms and kissed away her fears and doubts.

"Sit here by me, then. It's a queer throne for such a queen;
but it's the best your poor lover can find. He'll do better for you
some of these days, I'm thinking. Now your mind is easy once
again, is it not?"

"How can it ever be at ease, Jack, when I know that you are a
criminal among criminals, when I never know the day that I may
hear you are in court for murder? 'McMurdo the Scowrer,' that's
what one of our boarders called you yesterday. It went through
my heart like a knife."

"Sure, hard words break no bones."

"But they were true."

"Well, dear, it's not so bad as you think. We are but poor
men that are trying in our own way to get our rights."

Ettie threw her arms round her lover's neck. "Give it up, Jack!
For my sake, for God's sake, give it up! It was to ask you that
I came here to-day. Oh, Jack, see -- I beg it of you on my bended knees!
Kneeling here before you I implore you to give it up!"

He raised her and soothed her with her head against his breast.

"Sure, my darlin', you don't know what it is you are asking.
How could I give it up when it would be to break my oath and to
desert my comrades? If you could see how things stand with me
you could never ask it of me. Besides, if I wanted to, how could
I do it? You don't suppose that the lodge would let a man go free
with all its secrets?"

"I've thought of that, Jack. I've planned it all. Father has
saved some money. He is weary of this place where the fear of
these people darkens our lives. He is ready to go. We would fly
together to Philadelphia or New York, where we would be safe
from them."

McMurdo laughed. "The lodge has a long arm. Do you think
it could not stretch from here to Philadelphia or New York?"

"Well, then, to the West, or to England, or to Germany,
where father came from -- anywhere to get away from this
Valley of Fear!"

McMurdo thought of old Brother Morris. "Sure, it is the second
time I have heard the valley so named," said he. "The shadow
does indeed seem to lie heavy on some of you."

"It darkens every moment of our lives. Do you suppose that
Ted Baldwin has ever forgiven us? If it were not that he fears
you, what do you suppose our chances would be? If you saw the
look in those dark, hungry eyes of his when they fall on me!"

"By Gar! I'd teach him better manners if I caught him at it!
But see here, little girl. I can't leave here. I can't -- take that
from me once and for all. But if you will leave me to find my own
way, I will try to prepare a way of getting honourably out of it."

"There is no honour in such a matter."

"Well, well, it's just how you look at it. But if you'll give me
six months, I'll work it so that I can leave without being ashamed
to look others in the face."

The girl laughed with joy. "Six months!" she cried. "Is it a promise?"

"Well, it may be seven or eight. But within a year at the
furthest we will leave the valley behind us."

It was the most that Ettie could obtain, and yet it was something.
There was this distant light to illuminate the gloom of the
immediate future. She returned to her father's house more light-
hearted than she had ever been since Jack McMurdo had come
into her life.

It might be thought that as a member, all the doings of the
society would be told to him; but he was soon to discover that
the organization was wider and more complex than the simple
lodge. Even Boss McGinty was ignorant as to many things; for
there was an official named the County Delegate, living at
Hobson's Patch farther down the line, who had power over
several different lodges which he wielded in a sudden and
arbitrary way. Only once did McMurdo see him, a sly, little gray-
haired rat of a man, with a slinking gait and a sidelong glance
which was charged with malice. Evans Pott was his name, and
even the great Boss of Vermissa felt towards him something of
the repulsion and fear which the huge Danton may have felt for
the puny but dangerous Robespierre.

One day Scanlan, who was McMurdo's fellow boarder, received
a note from McGinty inclosing one from Evans Pott, which
informed him that he was sending over two good men, Lawler
and Andrews, who had instructions to act in the neighbourhood;
though it was best for the cause that no particulars as to
their objects should be given. Would the Bodymaster see to it
that suitable arrangements be made for their lodgings and
comfort until the time for action should arrive? McGinty added
that it was impossible for anyone to remain secret at the
Union House, and that, therefore, he would be obliged if
McMurdo and Scanlan would put the strangers up for a few days in
their boarding house.

The same evening the two men arrived, each carrying his
gripsack. Lawler was an elderly man, shrewd, silent, and self-
contained, clad in an old black frock coat, which with his soft
felt hat and ragged, grizzled beard gave him a general
resemblance to an itinerant preacher. His companion Andrews was
little more than a boy, frank-faced and cheerful, with the breezy
manner of one who is out for a holiday and means to enjoy every
minute of it. Both men were total abstainers, and behaved in all
ways as exemplary members of the society, with the one simple
exception that they were assassins who had often proved themselves
to be most capable instruments for this association of murder.
Lawler had already carried out fourteen commissions of the kind,
and Andrews three.

They were, as McMurdo found, quite ready to converse about
their deeds in the past, which they recounted with the half-
bashful pride of men who had done good and unselfish service
for the community. They were reticent, however, as to the
immediate job in hand.

"They chose us because neither I nor the boy here drink,"
Lawler explained. "They can count on us saying no more than
we should. You must not take it amiss, but it is the orders
of the County Delegate that we obey."

"Sure, we are all in it together," said Scanlan, McMurdo's
mate, as the four sat together at supper.

"That's true enough, and we'll talk till the cows come home
of the killing of Charlie Williams or of Simon Bird, or any other
job in the past. But till the work is done we say nothing."

"There are half a dozen about here that I have a word to say to,"
said McMurdo, with an oath. "I suppose it isn't Jack Knox of Ironhill
that you are after. I'd go some way to see him get his deserts."

"No, it's not him yet."

"Or Herman Strauss?"

"No, nor him either."

"Well, if you won't tell us we can't make you; but I'd be glad to know."

Lawler smiled and shook his head. He was not to be drawn.

In spite of the reticence of their guests, Scanlan and McMurdo
were quite determined to be present at what they called "the
fun." When, therefore, at an early hour one morning McMurdo
heard them creeping down the stairs he awakened Scanlan, and
the two hurried on their clothes. When they were dressed they
found that the others had stolen out, leaving the door open
behind them. It was not yet dawn, and by the light of the lamps
they could see the two men some distance down the street. They
followed them warily, treading noiselessly in the deep snow.

The boarding house was near the edge of the town, and soon
they were at the crossroads which is beyond its boundary. Here
three men were waiting, with whom Lawler and Andrews held a
short, eager conversation. Then they all moved on together. It
was clearly some notable job which needed numbers. At this
point there are several trails which lead to various mines. The
strangers took that which led to the Crow Hill, a huge business
which was in strong hands which had been able, thanks to their
energetic and fearless New England manager, Josiah H. Dunn,
to keep some order and discipline during the long reign of terror.

Day was breaking now, and a line of workmen were slowly making
their way, singly and in groups, along the blackened path.

McMurdo and Scanlan strolled on with the others, keeping in
sight of the men whom they followed. A thick mist lay over
them, and from the heart of it there came the sudden scream of a
steam whistle. It was the ten-minute signal before the cages
descended and the day's labour began.

When they reached the open space round the mine shaft there
were a hundred miners waiting, stamping their feet and blowing
on their fingers; for it was bitterly cold. The strangers stood in a
little group under the shadow of the engine house. Scanlan and
McMurdo climbed a heap of slag from which the whole scene
lay before them. They saw the mine engineer, a great bearded
Scotchman named Menzies, come out of the engine house and
blow his whistle for the cages to be lowered.

At the same instant a tall, loose-framed young man with a
clean-shaved, earnest face advanced eagerly towards the pit head.
As he came forward his eyes fell upon the group, silent and
motionless, under the engine house. The men had drawn down
their hats and turned up their collars to screen their faces. For a
moment the presentiment of Death laid its cold hand upon the
manager's heart. At the next he had shaken it off and saw only
his duty towards intrusive strangers.

"Who are you?" he asked as he advanced. "What are you
loitering there for?"

There was no answer; but the lad Andrews stepped forward and shot
him in the stomach. The hundred waiting miners stood as motionless
and helpless as if they were paralyzed. The manager clapped his
two hands to the wound and doubled himself up. Then he staggered
away; but another of the assassins fired, and he went down sidewise,
kicking and clawing among a heap of clinkers. Menzies, the Scotchman,
gave a roar of rage at the sight and rushed with an iron spanner at
the murderers; but was met by two balls in the face which dropped
him dead at their very feet.

There was a surge forward of some of the miners, and an inarticulate
cry of pity and of anger; but a couple of the strangers emptied their
six-shooters over the heads of the crowd, and they broke and scattered,
some of them rushing wildly back to their homes in Vermissa.

When a few of the bravest had rallied, and there was a return
to the mine, the murderous gang had vanished in the mists of
morning, without a single witness being able to swear to the
identity of these men who in front of a hundred spectators had
wrought this double crime.

Scanlan and McMurdo made their way back; Scanlan somewhat
subdued, for it was the first murder job that he had seen
with his own eyes, and it appeared less funny than he had been
led to believe. The horrible screams of the dead manager's
wife pursued them as they hurried to the town. McMurdo was
absorbed and silent; but he showed no sympathy for the
weakening of his companion.

"Sure, it is like a war," he repeated. "What is it but a war
between us and them, and we hit back where we best can."

There was high revel in the lodge room at the Union House
that night, not only over the killing of the manager and engineer
of the Crow Hill mine, which would bring this organization into
line with the other blackmailed and terror-stricken companies of
the district, but also over a distant triumph which had been
wrought by the hands of the lodge itself.

It would appear that when the County Delegate had sent over
five good men to strike a blow in Vermissa, he had demanded
that in return three Vermissa men should be secretly selected and
sent across to kill William Hales of Stake Royal, one of the best
known and most popular mine owners in the Gilmerton district, a
man who was believed not to have an enemy in the world; for he
was in all ways a model employer. He had insisted, however,
upon efficiency in the work, and had, therefore, paid off certain
drunken and idle employees who were members of the all-
powerful society. Coffin notices hung outside his door had not
weakened his resolution, and so in a free, civilized country he
found himself condemned to death.

The execution had now been duly carried out. Ted Baldwin, who
sprawled now in the seat of honour beside the Bodymaster, had
been chief of the party. His flushed face and glazed, blood-shot
eyes told of sleeplessness and drink. He and his two comrades
had spent the night before among the mountains. They were unkempt
and weather-stained. But no heroes, returning from a forlorn hope,
could have had a warmer welcome from their comrades.

The story was told and retold amid cries of delight and shouts
of laughter. They had waited for their man as he drove home at
nightfall, taking their station at the top of a steep hill, where his
horse must be at a walk. He was so furred to keep out the cold
that he could not lay his hand on his pistol. They had pulled him
out and shot him again and again. He had screamed for mercy.
The screams were repeated for the amusement of the lodge.

"Let's hear again how he squealed," they cried.

None of them knew the man; but there is eternal drama in a
killing, and they had shown the Scowrers of Gilmerton that the
Vermissa men were to be relied upon.

There had been one contretemps; for a man and his wife had
driven up while they were still emptying their revolvers into the
silent body. It had been suggested that they should shoot them
both; but they were harmless folk who were not connected with
the mines, so they were sternly bidden to drive on and keep
silent, lest a worse thing befall them. And so the blood-mottled
figure had been left as a warning to all such hard-hearted
employers, and the three noble avengers had hurried off into the
mountains where unbroken nature comes down to the very edge
of the furnaces and the slag heaps. Here they were, safe and
sound, their work well done, and the plaudits of their companions
in their ears.

It had been a great day for the Scowrers. The shadow had
fallen even darker over the valley. But as the wise general
chooses the moment of victory in which to redouble his efforts,
so that his foes may have no time to steady themselves after
disaster, so Boss McGinty, looking out upon the scene of his
operations with his brooding and malicious eyes, had devised a
new attack upon those who opposed him. That very night, as the
half-drunken company broke up, he touched McMurdo on the
arm and led him aside into that inner room where they had their
first interview.

"See here, my lad," said he, "I've got a job that's worthy of
you at last. You'll have the doing of it in your own hands."

"Proud I am to hear it," McMurdo answered.

"You can take two men with you -- Manders and Reilly. They
have been warned for service. We'll never be right in this district
until Chester Wilcox has been settled, and you'll have the thanks
of every lodge in the coal fields if you can down him."

"I'll do my best, anyhow. Who is he, and where shall I find him?"

McGinty took his eternal half-chewed, half-smoked cigar from
the corner of his mouth, and proceeded to draw a rough diagram
on a page torn from his notebook.

"He's the chief foreman of the Iron Dike Company. He's a
hard citizen, an old colour sergeant of the war, all scars and
grizzle. We've had two tries at him; but had no luck, and Jim
Carnaway lost his life over it. Now it's for you to take it over.
That's the house -- all alone at the Iron Dike crossroad, same as
you see here on the map -- without another within earshot. It's no
good by day. He's armed and shoots quick and straight, with no
questions asked. But at night -- well, there he is with his wife,
three children, and a hired help. You can't pick or choose. It's
all or none. If you could get a bag of blasting powder at the front
door with a slow match to it -- "

"What's the man done?"

"Didn't I tell you he shot Jim Carnaway?"

"Why did he shoot him?"

"What in thunder has that to do with you? Carnaway was
about his house at night, and he shot him. That's enough for me
and you. You've got to settle the thing right."

"There's these two women and the children. Do they go up too?"

"They have to -- else how can we get him?"

"It seems hard on them; for they've done nothing."

"What sort of fool's talk is this? Do you back out?"

"Easy, Councillor, easy! What have I ever said or done that you
should think I would be after standing back from an order of the
Bodymaster of my own lodge? If it's right or if it's wrong,
it's for you to decide."

"You'll do it, then?"

"Of course I will do it."

"When?"

"Well, you had best give me a night or two that I may see the
house and make my plans. Then --"

"Very good," said McGinty, shaking him by the hand. "I leave it with you.
It will be a great day when you bring us the news. It's just the last
stroke that will bring them all to their knees."

McMurdo thought long and deeply over the commission which
had been so suddenly placed in his hands. The isolated house in
which Chester Wilcox lived was about five miles off in an
adjacent valley. That very night he started off all alone to
prepare for the attempt. It was daylight before he returned from
his reconnaissance. Next day he interviewed his two subordinates,
Manders and Reilly, reckless youngsters who were as elated as if
it were a deer-hunt.

Two nights later they met outside the town, all three armed,
and one of them carrying a sack stuffed with the powder which
was used in the quarries. It was two in the morning before they
came to the lonely house. The night was a windy one, with
broken clouds drifting swiftly across the face of a three-quarter
moon. They had been warned to be on their guard against
bloodhounds; so they moved forward cautiously, with their pistols
cocked in their hands. But there was no sound save the howling of
the wind, and no movement but the swaying branches above them.

McMurdo listened at the door of the lonely house; but all was
still within. Then he leaned the powder bag against it, ripped a
hole in it with his knife, and attached the fuse. When it was well
alight he and his two companions took to their heels, and were
some distance off, safe and snug in a sheltering ditch, before the
shattering roar of the explosion, with the low, deep rumble of the
collapsing building, told them that their work was done. No
cleaner job had ever been carried out in the bloodstained annals
of the society.

But alas that work so well organized and boldly carried out
should all have gone for nothing! Warned by the fate of the
various victims, and knowing that he was marked down for
destruction, Chester Wilcox had moved himself and his family
only the day before to some safer and less known quarters,
where a guard of police should watch over them. It was an empty
house which had been torn down by the gunpowder, and the
grim old colour sergeant of the war was still teaching discipline
to the miners of Iron Dike.

"Leave him to me," said McMurdo. "He's my man, and I'll
get him sure if I have to wait a year for him."

A vote of thanks and confidence was passed in full lodge, and
so for the time the matter ended. When a few weeks later it was
reported in the papers that Wilcox had been shot at from an
ambuscade, it was an open secret that McMurdo was still at
work upon his unfinished job.

Such were the methods of the Society of Freemen, and such
were the deeds of the Scowrers by which they spread their rule
of fear over the great and rich district which was for so long a
period haunted by their terrible presence. Why should these
pages be stained by further crimes? Have I not said enough to
show the men and their methods?

These deeds are written in history, and there are records
wherein one may read the details of them. There one may learn
of the shooting of Policemen Hunt and Evans because they
had ventured to arrest two members of the society -- a double
outrage planned at the Vermissa lodge and carried out in cold
blood upon two helpless and disarmed men. There also one may
read of the shooting of Mrs. Larbey when she was nursing her
husband, who had been beaten almost to death by orders of
Boss McGinty. The killing of the elder Jenkins, shortly followed
by that of his brother, the mutilation of James Murdoch, the
blowing up of the Staphouse family, and the murder of the
Stendals all followed hard upon one another in the same terrible
winter.

Darkly the shadow lay upon the Valley of Fear. The spring
had come with running brooks and blossoming trees. There was
hope for all Nature bound so long in an iron grip; but nowhere
was there any hope for the men and women who lived under the
yoke of the terror. Never had the cloud above them been so dark
and hopeless as in the early summer of the year 1875.



Chapter 6
Danger

It was the height of the reign of terror. McMurdo, who had
already been appointed Inner Deacon, with every prospect of
some day succeeding McGinty as Bodymaster, was now so
necessary to the councils of his comrades that nothing was done
without his help and advice. The more popular he became,
however, with the Freemen, the blacker were the scowls which
greeted him as he passed along the streets of Vermissa. In spite
of their terror the citizens were taking heart to band themselves
together against their oppressors. Rumours had reached the lodge
of secret gatherings in the Herald office and of distribution of
firearms among the law-abiding people. But McGinty and his
men were undisturbed by such reports. They were numerous,
resolute, and well armed. Their opponents were scattered and
powerless. It would all end, as it had done in the past, in
aimless talk and possibly in impotent arrests. So said McGinty,
McMurdo, and all the bolder spirits.

It was a Saturday evening in May. Saturday was always the
lodge night, and McMurdo was leaving his house to attend it
when Morris, the weaker brother of the order, came to see him.
His brow was creased with care, and his kindly face was drawn
and haggard.

"Can I speak with you freely, Mr. McMurdo?"

"Sure."

"I can't forget that I spoke my heart to you once, and that you
kept it to yourself, even though the Boss himself came to ask
you about it."

"What else could I do if you trusted me? It wasn't that I
agreed with what you said."

"I know that well. But you are the one that I can speak to and
be safe. I've a secret here," he put his hand to his breast, "and
it is just burning the life out of me. I wish it had come to any one
of you but me. If I tell it, it will mean murder, for sure. If I
don't, it may bring the end of us all. God help me, but I am near
out of my wits over it!"

McMurdo looked at the man earnestly. He was trembling in
every limb. He poured some whisky into a glass and handed it to
him. "That's the physic for the likes of you," said he. "Now let
me hear of it."

Morris drank, and his white face took a tinge of colour. "I can
tell it to you all in one sentence," said he. "There's a detective
on our trail."

McMurdo stared at him in astonishment. "Why, man, you're
crazy," he said. "Isn't the place full of police and detectives
and what harm did they ever do us?"

"No, no, it's no man of the district. As you say, we know
them, and it is little that they can do. But you've heard of
Pinkerton's?"

"I've read of some folk of that name."

"Well, you can take it from me you've no show when they
are on your trail. It's not a take-it-or-miss-it government
concern. It's a dead earnest business proposition that's out for
results and keeps out till by hook or crook it gets them. If a
Pinkerton man is deep in this business, we are all destroyed."

"We must kill him."

"Ah, it's the first thought that came to you! So it will be up at
the lodge. Didn't I say to you that it would end in murder?"

"Sure, what is murder? Isn't it common enough in these
parts?"

"It is, indeed; but it's not for me to point out the man that is
to be murdered. I'd never rest easy again. And yet it's our own
necks that may be at stake. In God's name what shall I do?" He
rocked to and fro in his agony of indecision.

But his words had moved McMurdo deeply. It was easy to see
that he shared the other's opinion as to the danger, and the need
for meeting it. He gripped Morris's shoulder and shook him in
his earnestness.

"See here, man," he cried, and he almost screeched the
words in his excitement, "you won't gain anything by sitting
keening like an old wife at a wake. Let's have the facts. Who is
the fellow? Where is he? How did you hear of him? Why did
you come to me?"

"I came to you; for you are the one man that would advise me.
I told you that I had a store in the East before I came here. I left
good friends behind me, and one of them is in the telegraph
service. Here's a letter that I had from him yesterday. It's this
part from the top of the page. You can read it yourself."

This was what McMurdo read:

    How are the Scowrers getting on in your parts? We read

    plenty of them in the papers. Between you and me I expect

    to hear news from you before long. Five big corporations

    and the two railroads have taken the thing up in dead

    earnest. They mean it, and you can bet they'll get there!

    They are right deep down into it. Pinkerton has taken hold

    under their orders, and his best man, Birdy Edwards, is

    operating. The thing has got to be stopped right now.

"Now read the postscript."

      Of course, what I give you is what I learned in business;

    so it goes no further. It's a queer cipher that you handle by

    the yard every day and can get no meaning from.

McMurdo sat in silence for some time, with the letter in his
listless hands. The mist had lifted for a moment, and there was
the abyss before him.

"Does anyone else know of this?" he asked.

"I have told no one else."

"But this man -- your friend -- has he any other person that he
would be likely to write to?"

"Well, I dare say he knows one or two more."

"Of the lodge?"

"It's likely enough."

"I was asking because it is likely that he may have given
some description of this fellow Birdy Edwards -- then we could
get on his trail."

"Well, it's possible. But I should not think he knew him. He
is just telling me the news that came to him by way of business.
How would he know this Pinkerton man?"

McMurdo gave a violent start.

"By Gar!" he cried, "I've got him. What a fool I was not to
know it. Lord! but we're in luck! We will fix him before he can
do any harm. See here, Morris, will you leave this thing in my
hands?"

"Sure, if you will only take it off mine."

"I'll do that. You can stand right back and let me run it. Even
your name need not be mentioned. I'll take it all on myself, as if
it were to me that this letter has come. Will that content you?"

"It's just what I would ask."

"Then leave it at that and keep your head shut. Now I'll get
down to the lodge, and we'll soon make old man Pinkerton sorry
for himself."

"You wouldn't kill this man?"

"The less you know, Friend Morris, the easier your conscience
will be, and the better you will sleep. Ask no questions, and
let these things settle themselves. I have hold of it now."

Morris shook his head sadly as he left. "I feel that his blood is
on my hands," he groaned.

"Self-protection is no murder, anyhow," said McMurdo, smiling
grimly. "It's him or us. I guess this man would destroy us all
if we left him long in the valley. Why, Brother Morris, we'll
have to elect you Bodymaster yet; for you've surely saved the
lodge."

And yet it was clear from his actions that he thought more
seriously of this new intrusion than his words would show. It
may have been his guilty conscience, it may have been the
reputation of the Pinkerton organization, it may have been the
knowledge that great, rich corporations had set themselves the
task of clearing out the Scowrers; but, whatever his reason, his
actions were those of a man who is preparing for the worst.
Every paper which would incriminate him was destroyed before
he left the house. After that he gave a long sigh of satisfaction;
for it seemed to him that he was safe. And yet the danger must
still have pressed somewhat upon him; for on his way to the
lodge he stopped at old man Shafter's. The house was forbidden
him; but when he tapped at the window Ettie came out to him.
The dancing Irish deviltry had gone from her lover's eyes. She
read his danger in his earnest face.

"Something has happened!" she cried. "Oh, Jack, you are in
danger!"

"Sure, it is not very bad, my sweetheart. And yet it may be
wise that we make a move before it is worse."

"Make a move?"

"I promised you once that I would go some day. I think the
time is coming. I had news to-night, bad news, and I see trouble
coming."

"The police?"

"Well, a Pinkerton. But, sure, you wouldn't know what that
is, acushla, nor what it may mean to the likes of me. I'm too
deep in this thing, and I may have to get out of it quick. You
said you would come with me if I went."

"Oh, Jack, it would be the saving of you!"

"I'm an honest man in some things, Ettie. I wouldn't hurt a
hair of your bonny head for all that the world can give, nor ever
pull you down one inch from the golden throne above the clouds
where I always see you. Would you trust me?"

She put her hand in his without a word. "Well, then, listen to
what I say, and do as I order you, for indeed it's the only way
for us. Things are going to happen in this valley. I feel it in my
bones. There may be many of us that will have to look out for
ourselves. I'm one, anyhow. If I go, by day or night, it's you
that must come with me!"

"I'd come after you, Jack."

"No, no, you shall come with me. If this valley is closed to
me and I can never come back, how can I leave you behind, and
me perhaps in hiding from the police with never a chance of a
message? It's with me you must come. I know a good woman in
the place I come from, and it's there I'd leave you till we can get
married. Will you come?"

"Yes, Jack, I will come."

"God bless you for your trust in me! It's a fiend out of hell
that I should be if I abused it. Now, mark you, Ettie, it will be
just a word to you, and when it reaches you, you will drop
everything and come right down to the waiting room at the depot
and stay there till I come for you."

"Day or night, I'll come at the word, Jack."

Somewhat eased in mind, now that his own preparations for
escape had been begun, McMurdo went on to the lodge. It had
already assembled, and only by complicated signs and counter-
signs could he pass through the outer guard and inner guard who
close-tiled it. A buzz of pleasure and welcome greeted him as he
entered. The long room was crowded, and through the haze of
tobacco smoke he saw the tangled black mane of the Bodymaster,
the cruel, unfriendly features of Baldwin, the vulture face of
Harraway, the secretary, and a dozen more who were among the
leaders of the lodge. He rejoiced that they should all be there to
take counsel over his news.

"Indeed, it's glad we are to see you, Brother!" cried the
chairman. "There's business here that wants a Solomon in judgment
to set it right."

"It's Lander and Egan," explained his neighbour as he took
his seat. "They both claim the head money given by the lodge
for the shooting of old man Crabbe over at Stylestown, and
who's to say which fired the bullet?"

McMurdo rose in his place and raised his hand. The expression
of his face froze the attention of the audience. There was a
dead hush of expectation.

"Eminent Bodymaster," he said, in a solemn voice, "I claim
urgency!"

"Brother McMurdo claims urgency," said McGinty. "It's a
claim that by the rules of this lodge takes precedence. Now
Brother, we attend you."

McMurdo took the letter from his pocket.

"Eminent Bodymaster and Brethren," he said, "I am the
bearer of ill news this day; but it is better that it should be known
and discussed, than that a blow should fall upon us without
warning which would destroy us all. I have information that the
most powerful and richest organizations in this state have bound
themselves together for our destruction, and that at this very
moment there is a Pinkerton detective, one Birdy Edwards, at
work in the valley collecting the evidence which may put a rope
round the necks of many of us, and send every man in this room
into a felon's cell. That is the situation for the discussion of
which I have made a claim of urgency."

There was a dead silence in the room. It was broken by the
chairman.

"What is your evidence for this, Brother McMurdo?" he
asked.

"It is in this letter which has come into my hands," said
McMurdo. Me read the passage aloud. "It is a matter of honour
with me that I can give no further particulars about the letter, nor
put it into your hands; but I assure you that there is nothing else
in it which can affect the interests of the lodge. I put the case
before you as it has reached me."

"Let me say, Mr. Chairman," said one of the older brethren,
"that I have heard of Birdy Edwards, and that he has the name
of being the best man in the Pinkerton service."

"Does anyone know him by sight?" asked McGinty.

"Yes," said McMurdo, "I do."

There was a murmur of astonishment through the hall.

"I believe we hold him in the hollow of our hands," he
continued with an exulting smile upon his face. "If we act
quickly and wisely, we can cut this thing short. If I have your
confidence and your help, it is little that we have to fear."

"What have we to fear, anyhow? What can he know of our
affairs?"

"You might say so if all were as stanch as you, Councillor.
But this man has all the millions of the capitalists at his back. Do
you think there is no weaker brother among all our lodges that
could not be bought? He will get at our secrets -- maybe has got
them already. There's only one sure cure."

"That he never leaves the valley," said Baldwin.

McMurdo nodded. "Good for you, Brother Baldwin," he
said. "You and I have had our differences, but you have said the
true word to-night."

"Where is he, then? Where shall we know him?"

"Eminent Bodymaster," said McMurdo, earnestly, "I would
put it to you that this is too vital a thing for us to discuss in open
lodge. God forbid that I should throw a doubt on anyone here;
but if so much as a word of gossip got to the ears of this man,
there would be an end of any chance of our getting him. I would
ask the lodge to choose a trusty committee, Mr. Chairman --
yourself, if I might suggest it, and Brother Baldwin here, and
five more. Then I can talk freely of what I know and of what I
advise should be done."

The proposition was at once adopted, and the committee
chosen. Besides the chairman and Baldwin there were the vulture-
faced secretary, Harraway, Tiger Cormac, the brutal young
assassin, Carter, the treasurer, and the brothers Willaby,
fearless and desperate men who would stick at nothing.

The usual revelry of the lodge was short and subdued: for
there was a cloud upon the men's spirits, and many there for the
first time began to see the cloud of avenging Law drifting up in
that serene sky under which they had dwelt so long. The horrors
they had dealt out to others had been so much a part of their
settled lives that the thought of retribution had become a remote
one, and so seemed the more startling now that it came so
closely upon them. They broke up early and left their leaders to
their council.

"Now, McMurdo!" said McGinty when they were alone. The
seven men sat frozen in their seats.

"I said just now that I knew Birdy Edwards," McMurdo
explained. "I need not tell you that he is not here under that
name. He's a brave man, but not a crazy one. He passes under
the name of Steve Wilson, and he is lodging at Hobson's Patch."

"How do you know this?"

"Because I fell into talk with him. I thought little of it at the
time, nor would have given it a second thought but for this letter;
but now I'm sure it's the man. I met him on the cars when I went
down the line on Wednesday -- a hard case if ever there was one.
He said he was a reporter. I believed it for the moment. Wanted
to know all he could about the Scowrers and what he called 'the
outrages' for a New York paper. Asked me every kind of
question so as to get something. You bet I was giving nothing
away. 'I'd pay for it and pay well,' said he, 'if I could get some
stuff that would suit my editor.' I said what I thought would
please him best, and he handed me a twenty-dollar bill for my
information. 'There's ten times that for you,' said he, 'if you can
find me all that I want.'"

"What did you tell him, then?"

"Any stuff I could make up."

"How do you know he wasn't a newspaper man?"

"I'll tell you. He got out at Hobson's Patch, and so did I. I
chanced into the telegraph bureau, and he was leaving it.

"'See here,' said the operator after he'd gone out, 'I guess
we should charge double rates for this.' -- 'I guess you should,'
said I. He had filled the form with stuff that might have been
Chinese, for all we could make of it. 'He fires a sheet of this off
every day,' said the clerk. 'Yes,' said I; 'it's special news for his
paper, and he's scared that the others should tap it.' That was
what the operator thought and what I thought at the time; but I
think differently now."

"By Gar! I believe you are right," said McGinty. "But what
do you allow that we should do about it?"

"Why not go right down now and fix him?" someone suggested.

"Ay, the sooner the better."

"I'd start this next minute if I knew where we could find
him," said McMurdo. "He's in Hobson's Patch; but I don't
know the house. I've got a plan, though, if you'll only take my
advice."

"Well, what is it?"

"I'll go to the Patch to-morrow morning. I'll find him through
the operator. He can locate him, I guess. Well, then I'll tell him
that I'm a Freeman myself. I'll offer him all the secrets of the
lodge for a price. You bet he'll tumble to it. I'll tell him the
papers are at my house, and that it's as much as my life would
be worth to let him come while folk were about. He'll see that
that's horse sense. Let him come at ten o'clock at night, and he
shall see everything. That will fetch him sure."

"Well?"

"You can plan the rest for yourselves. Widow MacNamara's
is a lonely house. She's as true as steel and as deaf as a post.
There's only Scanlan and me in the house. If I get his promise --
and I'll let you know if I do -- I'd have the whole seven of you
come to me by nine o'clock. We'll get him in. If ever he gets out
alive -- well, he can talk of Birdy Edwards's luck for the rest of
his days!"

"There's going to be a vacancy at Pinkerton's or I'm mistaken.
Leave it at that, McMurdo. At nine to-morrow we'll be with you.
You once get the door shut behind him, and you can leave the rest
with us."



Chapter 7
The Trapping of Birdy Edwards

As McMurdo had said, the house in which he lived was a
lonely one and very well suited for such a crime as they had
planned. It was on the extreme fringe of the town and stood well
back from the road. In any other case the conspirators would
have simply called out their man, as they had many a time
before, and emptied their pistols into his body; but in this
instance it was very necessary to find out how much he knew,
how he knew it, and what had been passed on to his employers.

It was possible that they were already too late and that the
work had been done. If that was indeed so, they could at least
have their revenge upon the man who had done it. But they were
hopeful that nothing of great importance had yet come to the
detective's knowledge, as otherwise, they argued, he would not
have troubled to write down and forward such trivial information
as McMurdo claimed to have given him. However, all this they
would learn from his own lips. Once in their power, they would
find a way to make him speak. It was not the first time that they
had handled an unwilling witness.

McMurdo went to Hobson's Patch as agreed. The police
seemed to take particular interest in him that morning, and
Captain Marvin -- he who had claimed the old acquaintance with
him at Chicago -- actually addressed him as he waited at the
station. McMurdo turned away and refused to speak with him.
He was back from his mission in the afternoon, and saw McGinty
at the Union House.

"He is coming," he said.

"Good!" said McGinty. The giant was in his shirt sleeves,
with chains and seals gleaming athwart his ample waistcoat and a
diamond twinkling through the fringe of his bristling beard.
Drink and politics had made the Boss a very rich as well as
powerful man. The more terrible, therefore, seemed that glimpse
of the prison or the gallows which had risen before him the night
before.

"Do you reckon he knows much?" he asked anxiously.

McMurdo shook his head gloomily. "He's been here some
time -- six weeks at the least. I guess he didn't come into these
parts to look at the prospect. If he has been working among us
all that time with the railroad money at his back, I should expect
that he has got results, and that he has passed them on."

"There's not a weak man in the lodge," cried McGinty.
"True as steel, every man of them. And yet, by the Lord! there
is that skunk Morris. What about him? If any man gives us
away, it would be he. I've a mind to send a couple of the boys
round before evening to give him a beating up and see what they
can get from him."

"Well, there would be no harm in that," McMurdo answered.
"I won't deny that I have a liking for Morris and would be sorry
to see him come to harm. He has spoken to me once or twice
over lodge matters, and though he may not see them the same as
you or I, he never seemed the sort that squeals. But still it is not
for me to stand between him and you."

"I'll fix the old devil!" said McGinty with an oath. "I've had
my eye on him this year past."

"Well, you know best about that," McMurdo answered. "But
whatever you do must be to-morrow; for we must lie low until
the Pinkerton affair is settled up. We can't afford to set the
police buzzing, to-day of all days."

"True for you," said McGinty. "And we'll learn from Birdy
Edwards himself where he got his news if we have to cut his
heart out first. Did he seem to scent a trap?"

McMurdo laughed. "I guess I took him on his weak point,"
he said. "If he could get on a good trail of the Scowrers, he's
ready to follow it into hell. I took his money," McMurdo
grinned as he produced a wad of dollar notes, "and as much
more when he has seen all my papers."

"What papers?"

"Well, there are no papers. But I filled him up about
constitutions and books of rules and forms of membership.
He expects to get right down to the end of everything
before he leaves."

"Faith, he's right there," said McGinty grimly. "Didn't he
ask you why you didn't bring him the papers?"

"As if I would carry such things, and me a suspected man,
and Captain Marvin after speaking to me this very day at the
depot!"

"Ay, I heard of that," said McGinty. "I guess the heavy end
of this business is coming on to you. We could put him down an
old shaft when we've done with him; but however we work it we
can't get past the man living at Hobson's Patch and you being
there to-day."

McMurdo shrugged his shoulders. "If we handle it right, they
can never prove the killing," said he. "No one can see him
come to the house after dark, and I'll lay to it that no one will
see him go. Now see here, Councillor, I'll show you my plan
and I'll ask you to fit the others into it. You will all come in
good time. Very well. He comes at ten. He is to tap three times,
and me to open the door for him. Then I'll get behind him and
shut it. He's our man then."

"That's all easy and plain."

"Yes; but the next step wants considering. He's a hard
proposition. He's heavily armed. I've fooled him proper, and yet
he is likely to be on his guard. Suppose I show him right into a
room with seven men in it where he expected to find me alone.
There is going to be shooting, and somebody is going to be hurt."

"That's so."

"And the noise is going to bring every damned copper in the
township on top of it."

"I guess you are right."

"This is how I should work it. You will all be in the big
room -- same as you saw when you had a chat with me. I'll open
the door for him, show him into the parlour beside the door, and
leave him there while I get the papers. That will give me the
chance of telling you how things are shaping. Then I will go
back to him with some faked papers. As he is reading them I will
jump for him and get my grip on his pistol arm. You'll hear me
call and in you will rush. The quicker the better; for he is as
strong a man as I, and I may have more than I can manage. But I
allow that I can hold him till you come."

"It's a good plan," said McGinty. "The lodge will owe you a
debt for this. I guess when I move out of the chair I can put a
name to the man that's coming after me."

"Sure, Councillor, I am little more than a recruit," said
McMurdo; but his face showed what he thought of the great
man's compliment.

When he had returned home he made his own preparations for
the grim evening in front of him. First he cleaned, oiled, and
loaded his Smith & Wesson revolver. Then he surveyed the
room in which the detective was to be trapped. It was a large
apartment, with a long deal table in the centre, and the big stove
at one side. At each of the other sides were windows. There
were no shutters on these: only light curtains which drew across.
McMurdo examined these attentively. No doubt it must have
struck him that the apartment was very exposed for so secret a
meeting. Yet its distance from the road made it of less consequence.
Finally he discussed the matter with his fellow lodger. Scanlan,
though a Scowrer, was an inoffensive little man who was too weak
to stand against the opinion of his comrades, but was secretly
horrified by the deeds of blood at which he had sometimes been
forced to assist. McMurdo told him shortly what was intended.

"And if I were you, Mike Scanlan, I would take a night off
and keep clear of it. There will be bloody work here before
morning."

"Well, indeed then, Mac," Scanlan answered. "It's not the
will but the nerve that is wanting in me. When I saw Manager
Dunn go down at the colliery yonder it was just more than I
could stand. I'm not made for it, same as you or McGinty. If the
lodge will think none the worse of me, I'll just do as you advise
and leave you to yourselves for the evening."

The men came in good time as arranged. They were outwardly
respectable citizens, well clad and cleanly; but a judge of
faces would have read little hope for Birdy Edwards in those
hard mouths and remorseless eyes. There was not a man in the
room whose hands had not been reddened a dozen times before.
They were as hardened to human murder as a butcher to sheep.

Foremost, of course, both in appearance and in guilt, was the
formidable Boss. Harraway, the secretary, was a lean, bitter man
with a long, scraggy neck and nervous, jerky limbs, a man of
incorruptible fidelity where the finances of the order were
concerned, and with no notion of justice or honesty to anyone
beyond. The treasurer, Carter, was a middle-aged man, with an
impassive, rather sulky expression, and a yellow parchment skin.
He was a capable organizer, and the actual details of nearly
every outrage had sprung from his plotting brain. The two
Willabys were men of action, tall, lithe young fellows with
determined faces, while their companion, Tiger Cormac, a heavy,
dark youth, was feared even by his own comrades for the
ferocity of his disposition. These were the men who assembled
that night under the roof of McMurdo for the killing of the
Pinkerton detective.

Their host had placed whisky upon the table, and they had
hastened to prime themselves for the work before them. Baldwin
and Cormac were already half-drunk, and the liquor had brought
out all their ferocity. Cormac placed his hands on the stove for
an instant -- it had been lighted, for the nights were still cold.

"That will do," said he, with an oath.

"Ay," said Baldwin, catching his meaning. "If he is strapped
to that, we will have the truth out of him."

"We'll have the truth out of him, never fear," said McMurdo.
He had nerves of steel, this man; for though the whole weight of
the affair was on him his manner was as cool and unconcerned as
ever. The others marked it and applauded.

"You are the one to handle him," said the Boss approvingly.
"Not a warning will he get till your hand is on his throat. It's a
pity there are no shutters to your windows."

McMurdo went from one to the other and drew the curtains
tighter. "Sure no one can spy upon us now. It's close upon the
hour."

"Maybe he won't come. Maybe he'll get a sniff of danger,"
said the secretary.

"He'll come, never fear," McMurdo answered. "He is as
eager to come as you can be to see him. Hark to that!"

They all sat like wax figures, some with their glasses arrested
halfway to their lips. Three loud knocks had sounded at the door.

"Hush!" McMurdo raised his hand in caution. An exulting
glance went round the circle, and hands were laid upon hidden
weapons.

"Not a sound, for your lives!" McMurdo whispered, as he
went from the room, closing the door carefully behind him.

With strained ears the murderers waited. They counted the
steps of their comrade down the passage. Then they heard him
open the outer door. There were a few words as of greeting.
Then they were aware of a strange step inside and of an
unfamiliar voice. An instant later came the slam of the door
and the turning of the key in the lock. Their prey was safe
within the trap. Tiger Cormac laughed horribly, and Boss
McGinty clapped his great hand across his mouth.

"Be quiet, you fool!" he whispered. "You'll be the undoing
of us yet!"

There was a mutter of conversation from the next room. It
seemed interminable. Then the door opened, and McMurdo
appeared, his finger upon his lip.

He came to the end of the table and looked round at them. A
subtle change had come over him. His manner was as of one
who has great work to do. His face had set into granite firmness.
His eyes shone with a fierce excitement behind his spectacles.
He had become a visible leader of men. They stared at him with
eager interest; but he said nothing. Still with the same singular
gaze he looked from man to man.

"Well!" cried Boss McGinty at last. "Is he here? Is Birdy
Edwards here?"

"Yes," McMurdo answered slowly. "Birdy Edwards is here.
I am Birdy Edwards!"

There were ten seconds after that brief speech during which
the room might have been empty, so profound was the silence.
The hissing of a kettle upon the stove rose sharp and strident to
the ear. Seven white faces, all turned upward to this man who
dominated them, were set motionless with utter terror. Then,
with a sudden shivering of glass, a bristle of glistening rifle
barrels broke through each window, while the curtains were torn
from their hangings.

At the sight Boss McGinty gave the roar of a wounded bear
and plunged for the half-opened door. A levelled revolver met
him there with the stern blue eyes of Captain Marvin of the Mine
Police gleaming behind the sights. The Boss recoiled and fell
back into his chair.

"You're safer there, Councillor," said the man whom they
had known as McMurdo. "And you, Baldwin, if you don't take
your hand off your pistol, you'll cheat the hangman yet. Pull it
out, or by the Lord that made me -- There, that will do. There are
forty armed men round this house, and you can figure it out for
yourself what chance you have. Take their pistols, Marvin!"

There was no possible resistance under the menace of those
rifles. The men were disarmed. Sulky, sheepish, and amazed,
they still sat round the table.

"I'd like to say a word to you before we separate," said the
man who had trapped them. "I guess we may not meet again
until you see me on the stand in the courthouse. I'll give you
something to think over between now and then. You know me
now for what I am. At last I can put my cards on the table. I am
Birdy Edwards of Pinkerton's. I was chosen to break up your
gang. I had a hard and dangerous game to play. Not a soul, not
one soul, not my nearest and dearest, knew that I was playing it.
Only Captain Marvin here and my employers knew that. But it's
over to-night, thank God, and I am the winner!"

The seven pale, rigid faces looked up at him. There was
unappeasable hatred in their eyes. He read the relentless threat.

"Maybe you think that the game is not over yet. Well, I take
my chance of that. Anyhow, some of you will take no further
hand, and there are sixty more besides yourselves that will see a
jail this night. I'll tell you this, that when I was put upon this job
I never believed there was such a society as yours. I thought it
was paper talk, and that I would prove it so. They told me it was
to do with the Freemen; so I went to Chicago and was made one.
Then I was surer than ever that it was just paper talk; for I found
no harm in the society, but a deal of good.

"Still, I had to carry out my job, and I came to the coal
valleys. When I reached this place I learned that I was wrong
and that it wasn't a dime novel after all. So I stayed to look after
it. I never killed a man in Chicago. I never minted a dollar in my
life. Those I gave you were as good as any others; but I never
spent money better. But I knew the way into your good wishes
and so I pretended to you that the law was after me. It all worked
just as I thought.

"So I joined your infernal lodge, and I took my share in your
councils. Maybe they will say that I was as bad as you. They can
say what they like, so long as I get you. But what is the truth?
The night I joined you beat up old man Stanger. I could not warn
him, for there was no time; but I held your hand, Baldwin, when
you would have killed him. If ever I have suggested things, so as
to keep my place among you, they were things which I knew I
could prevent. I could not save Dunn and Menzies, for I did not
know enough; but I will see that their murderers are hanged. I
gave Chester Wilcox warning, so that when I blew his house in
he and his folk were in hiding. There was many a crime that I
could not stop; but if you look back and think how often your
man came home the other road, or was down in town when you
went for him, or stayed indoors when you thought he would
come out, you'll see my work."

"You blasted traitor!" hissed McGinty through his closed
teeth.

"Ay, John McGinty, you may call me that if it eases your
smart. You and your like have been the enemy of God and man
in these parts. It took a man to get between you and the poor
devils of men and women that you held under your grip. There
was just one way of doing it, and I did it. You call me a traitor;
but I guess there's many a thousand will call me a deliverer that
went down into hell to save them. I've had three months of it. I
wouldn't have three such months again if they let me loose in the
treasury at Washington for it. I had to stay till I had it all, every
man and every secret right here in this hand. I'd have waited a
little longer if it hadn't come to my knowledge that my secret
was coming out. A letter had come into the town that would
have set you wise to it all. Then I had to act and act quickly.

"I've nothing more to say to you, except that when my time
comes I'll die the easier when I think of the work I have done in
this valley. Now, Marvin, I'll keep you no more. Take them in
and get it over."

There is little more to tell. Scanlan had been given a sealed
note to be left at the address of Miss Ettie Shafter, a mission
which he had accepted with a wink and a knowing smile. In the
early hours of the morning a beautiful woman and a much
muffled man boarded a special train which had been sent by the
railroad company, and made a swift, unbroken journey out of the
land of danger. It was the last time that ever either Ettie or her
lover set foot in the Valley of Fear. Ten days later they were
married in Chicago, with old Jacob Shafter as witness of the
wedding.

The trial of the Scowrers was held far from the place where
their adherents might have terrified the guardians of the law.
In vain they struggled. In vain the money of the lodge -- money
squeezed by blackmail out of the whole countryside -- was spent
like water in the attempt to save them. That cold, clear,
unimpassioned statement from one who knew every detail of their
lives, their organization, and their crimes was unshaken by all
the wiles of their defenders. At last after so many years they
were broken and scattered. The cloud was lifted forever from the
valley.

McGinty met his fate upon the scaffold, cringing and whining
when the last hour came. Eight of his chief followers shared his
fate. Fifty-odd had various degrees of imprisonment. The work
of Birdy Edwards was complete.

And yet, as he had guessed, the game was not over yet. There
was another hand to be played, and yet another and another.
Ted Baldwin, for one, had escaped the scaffold; so had the Willabys;
so had several others of the fiercest spirits of the gang. For ten
years they were out of the world, and then came a day when they
were free once more -- a day which Edwards, who knew his men,
was very sure would be an end of his life of peace. They had
sworn an oath on all that they thought holy to have his blood as a
vengeance for their comrades. And well they strove to keep their
vow!

From Chicago he was chased, after two attempts so near
success that it was sure that the third would get him. From Chicago
he went under a changed name to California, and it was there
that the light went for a time out of his life when Ettie Edwards
died. Once again he was nearly killed, and once again under the
name of Douglas he worked in a lonely canyon, where with an
English partner named Barker he amassed a fortune. At last there
came a warning to him that the bloodhounds were on his track
once more, and he cleared -- only just in time -- for England. And
thence came the John Douglas who for a second time married a worthy
mate, and lived for five years as a Sussex county gentleman, a life
which ended with the strange happenings of which we have heard.


Epilogue



The police trial had passed, in which the case of John Douglas
was referred to a higher court. So had the Quarter Sessions, at
which he was acquitted as having acted in self-defense.

"Get him out of England at any cost," wrote Holmes to the
wife. "There are forces here which may be more dangerous than
those he has escaped. There is no safety for your husband in
England."

Two months had gone by, and the case had to some extent
passed from our minds. Then one morning there came an enigmatic
note slipped into our letter box. "Dear me, Mr. Holmes.
Dear me!" said this singular epistle. There was neither
superscription nor signature. I laughed at the quaint message;
but Holmes showed unwonted seriousness.

"Deviltry, Watson!" he remarked, and sat long with a clouded
brow.

Late last night Mrs. Hudson, our landlady, brought up a
message that a gentleman wished to see Holmes, and that the
matter was of the utmost importance. Close at the heels of his
messenger came Cecil Barker, our friend of the moated Manor
House. His face was drawn and haggard.

"I've had bad news -- terrible news, Mr. Holmes," said he.

"I feared as much," said Holmes.

"You have not had a cable, have you?"

"I have had a note from someone who has."

"It's poor Douglas. They tell me his name is Edwards; but he
will always be Jack Douglas of Benito Canyon to me. I told you
that they started together for South Africa in the Palmyra three
weeks ago."

"Exactly."

"The ship reached Cape Town last night. I received this cable from Mrs
Douglas this morning: --

"Jack has been lost overboard in gale off St Helena. No one knows how
accident occurred. -- Ivy Douglas."

"Ha! It came like that, did it?" said Holmes, thoughtfully. "Well, I've
no doubt it was well stage-managed."

"You mean that you think there was no accident?"

"None in the world."

"He was murdered?"

"Surely!"

"So I think also. These infernal Scowrers, this cursed vindictive nest of
criminals --"

"No, no, my good sir," said Holmes. "There is a master hand here. It is no
case of sawed-off shot-guns and clumsy six-shooters. You can tell an old
master by the sweep of his brush. I can tell a Moriarty when I see one.
This crime is from London, not from America."

"But for what motive?"

"Because it is done by a man who cannot afford to fail -- one whose whole
unique position depends upon the fact that all he does must succeed. A
great brain and a huge organization have been turned to the extinction of
one man. It is crushing the nut with the hammer -- an absurd extravagance
of energy -- but the nut is very effectually crushed all the same."

"How came this man to have anything to do with it?"

"I can only say that the first word that ever came to us of the business
was from one of his lieutenants. These Americans were well advised.
Having an English job to do, they took into partnership, as any foreign
criminal could do, this great consultant in crime. From that moment
their man was doomed. At first he would content himself by using his
machinery in order to find their victim. Then he would indicate how the
matter might be treated. Finally, when he read in the reports of the
failure of this agent, he would step in himself with a master touch. You
heard me warn this man at Birlstone Manor House that the coming danger
was greater than the past. Was I right?"

Barker beat his head with his clenched fist in his impotent anger.

"Do you tell me that we have to sit down under this? Do you say that
no one can ever get level with this king-devil?"

"No, I don't say that," said Holmes, and his eyes seemed to be looking far
into the future. "I don't say that he can't be beat. But you must give me
time -- you must give me time!"

We all sat in silence for some minutes, while those fateful eyes still
strained to pierce the veil.





End of Project Gutenberg Etext The Valley of Fear, by Arthur Conan Doyle

